editorial board profesior satish chandra chairman professor r.s.
sharma professor barua de professor sumit sarka professor m. g.s narayanan shet s. h. khan shri atjon dev comener medieval india a textbook for classes xixii part il satsh chandra  o et v sy aie sfrere ey national council of educational research and training e 98 p, 167rss  nt coumitof edcions reserch und g, 197 rs.
3.65 publishd atthe publication department by vx, pandit secretary.
national council of educational research and.
training, sa1 aurobindo marg, new delki 10i6 and printed at supreme opfset press.
ks malviva nagar new delh  foreword i t e pattern of educution, he highr secondary stag e 2 sage as beca vinualisd 0 termunal 50 9 o caab studeats o eate e and 1o equp taem fo advaned cducation the cosrses up o clss x eave been desigand for eacral cducation without any diversigeation.
bt a e higher scondary stage the student would be imated into the study ofspeialised courses i a few subjecs of his choice the bditorial owrd in hisory falsed the courscs of studis st the 2 tage a0d strted preparing sries o texbosks based oa thes courses.
the present volume ealing with  bistorsal survey of medieval iadia has been prepared by profesor stish chandra, who is also the chaiman of the history editorial board.
the ncert is gratefl to b for competng the work m a very short time.the ncert is alo gratefl o many other persos, both belonging 0 the ncert and ovtsde, and organsationsfo thie help and cooperation.
our special thanks aro due to shri 5. h. khan for preparin the excriss, to dr. 5. k. s and kan, indira sraivasan for e hlp n prepar 1ng the press copy, o shi a. k. ghose for the maps, and 1o the archacological survey ofindia for making availabl to s photographs which have boco meloded n this book.
thi volume on medieval indi i th second 1n the sries of estbooks which a1 being brooght oot by the ncert fo the highersecondary stags.
the book is being brought out n two partsthe frst part of the book was published in february 1978, this 1 th sccond partof the bock.
the ncert will b gratelul for any comments and ssggestions on any aspeot of the presen volume.
s k. mrtaa director national council of new delhi bducational research and traming prefuce history forys a part o s uadiversified corrculum i general education fo the st tem years of schooling.
the course n history up o tis stago i, therefors, aimed at acquainting the pupil with important trends and developments in the mistory of india and of the world the courss at the 2 or the higher secondary stage bave been framed keeping n view the foundations to be laid during the ten years of general education their maia purposes av fo broaden and decpen the historical knowledge of the pupil, o intzodus him to te rgocous of the discipline, and to prepare hum for higher academic studies in the sbject.
the courses in history at the higher secoadary stage which hav been framed by the editorial board are th results of discussions with eachers, teacherod cators and cxperts.
the board plans to prepse other texbooks for the courses i istory the syllabus included optional sourses o the history of rglons out side india, and testhooks on these courses would be prepared when these courcs are mtroduced in schools.
the preseat volume covers medieval india from abost the eighth centary 1o about the carly cighteenth century, efort has been made i this book to igh light the foroes and factors which moukded tndian socety and culture fn medioval times.
the book points out the significant changes that took place i the medieval period of our history.
ateation has been paid o the gontribution of the people, belonging to diferet regions and adheing to diffrent fiths.o the growth of indian society and culture i this percd.
the editorml board is gratefu to profesor satish chadra for undertaking the writing of this book.
the board also sincerely thaaks all the other persons for their help in connection with the publiction of tis book.
hisroxy eotroniat boazo new delhi xvid cllmax dod disisteation o the moghal enmpire1 problem of succession autangeels reigatiu religiovs folly poiical developmenta north adia reiatioss mith the rajputs rreach with manwas and movwar xvit clinax a0d disiotegracion of the mugha empire2 the rise o the marathasi aurangieb and decexnu stniss avrang 2sb, marathas and the descanthe last phase pecine of the mughal empireresponsibiity of aurasgsst.
xix assament and roview appendices mar 1 tndia a the early sixeenths centuey mar2 mughal empwe n 1605 mar 3 moghal baspice a the ead of the seveatecath century 20 m 24 bee crarter xnl struggle for empire in north india mughals and afghans 15251556 o ot i 4 b rortio chsges ook plae i cestral 124 wt a during the st century, afer he dsitgrain of the mongel e the foutenth centory, timas waited t and toun undo 000 ol guco sgin.
timus ampis extended from the ower volga to the sivr inde, and nclded asia mo modeen tuskey, i, transoxisoa, afgharisan and a part of the punjb.
tumar i in 104, but b grandaon, shahrakh mica 6.
1448, wis abieto ke fact  lage pat of his cogire.
ho g putrouge 10 aris and ietiers, ad n i i, samand snd feat becam thecukral cntrs of west a, the e of samarqund hd ret presig i the enie tl word.
the power of the timerids docied iy dain th cond l f the ffeenth centry gl du o e tiaurid sadion of partiionag the empi.
the varions tioundpriscpuliies which orow wers slways fghtiog 1nd wrsgling amceg then ke, this povidedan opportniy to w0 sow s tocome 1o e forerot.
from he norh, moogolribe, the usbes, hrst into transoxiaa.
the ushes b become mo, bt we iooked down vpon b the tiauids who covsidered them 6 be w cutared barbaian.
farter o the w,  e dynaty, the sefivid dynssty, began 10 domisate irin.
the safavids descended from a0 onder of sunts who traced thir ancetey to the prophet.
they supporied the shiltesect amosg he muslims, and persceted those who.
were ot prepared o accep the shife tenets.
the usbeks, 0 the other hand, were summis.
thus, poiical confict between these two clements was embitteed by sctrian confict, furthe o the west of iran, the powes ofthe ottoman torks was rsig, they wanted to donisate eastn butope 25 wl a8 ing and tran.
thus, the sene was set for the conict of thsee mighty capiresin asa during the sixteenth century.
in 1454, at the young age of 14, bbur suoxedod to farghans,  small sate in trasworiana, obliviews of the usbek danger, the timurid princes were busy fighting ooc ancthr.
babir, 0o, made a bid 1o conguer semarquad from his wncle.
he won the oy e bt lost 1t 1 o ime on both the occasions.
the scond time the usbek chief, shaibani khan, was calledia 1o belp ot babur.
saiband defeated babur 1ad conguered sumasqued.
soo, be overran herest of the timurid kingdoms in the ars.
this ford babar to move towards kabul which be can querd i 1504, for the sext 14 yeers, babur kupt bidin b timefo th.
secongquest of his homeland from he usbel.
he ried to enlist thehelp of bis unc, the e o hecst, i the eserpae bt to o avail.
ulimatly, hert, lo, whs averun by shaeani khan.
thisled tos dinct conflc betwen the usbeks and e safvids sncethe atr also ad i o hert and the serrounding .
which i el khoraan by contemporuy witess.
tn fumous bate 1510, shah tenil, the b of tn, dfeated 4 kild shaibani rhan baber now made anodber atempt 0 over samarqund, tis e wit te elp of e t fores.
hewas doly installed at suaraand, bot chafed undec the conirl of e tnniangeaels who wanted 1o treat babur 1 the govrmor of n trnian provisce cxtber ta 134 ndependent price mean e, the usbek ecovered rapiy from teie efeat.
o sgain bobur was owted from sumarand nd dad 1o retam to kabul.
fisally,shah tymai biself was defeted in tamous basl by the ottoman sulan, thus lexving the usbeks mastes of trins.oxans.
thes deslopments sy forced babar o ook towars india.
l baba sas tha from the ime be obsined kabul1504 o s vctory a paipat, 1 had never cesed to thnk of the conguest of hindusan.
dot bo had vever found s  bl oppotuityfo undertabing i hindered 1 v sometines by the spprbensces of e db scestor, timr,bad nt only caried sy 8 s rsviee 1ad.
many skl artuas, who.
helped him to comolidate s pes asian empire and besutfy is capicd, bt o annexed sorse areas i he puajab.
these sreas remaized s the possesion of timurs succemors for seveal gemerations.
when s congoered alghanisten, .
folt that he rada legtimate igh o these arcas.
asotber reason why babur coveted the punjab parganas ws the meagre income of kb, the historan abal fal remarka he haberrled ovr badakbiban, qundher and kabul which did pot yid sullient incoms for the requirements of he amy in i, in some of the border terroris heex.
pente oncontelling the arrcs und sdminists.
on was reter than the ocome.
wath these meagre resources babor could not provide well tor s begs and kinen, he wes aso appre heasive of an uk stack on katel, ssd comsideed inda o be o good plce of refuge, a0 a suiable bas for operation sgeint he usbeks, the polticl sitstion in norhwest tndia w wuiable for babars eniry im0 india siandar lodi had disd in 1917, sod torbim lodi bad sececded him.
torshisrs effrts 1o ceste lrge centabsed.
mpire bad marmed the afghin chiet ss wal a8 the raiputs.
amongst tho rmost poverful of the affhan chefs was duuiat khan lodi, the ovemnor of the pusiab, who was alnost an independentruler.
daula khar attempld to conclnt drabi lodi by sending his son ta hiscourt o pey homage.
at th same time, e wanted szengtben his postion by annes.
ing the fronte tracts of bhiza, et i 151819, bubur conquered.the powertul fort of bhia.
he then sent otes and vrtal messages 0 dault khan and.
torahum lodi, askingfo the cssion of the aras which bad belonged 0 the turks, but daulat knan detined baburs eavoy st lahore, either rasting s audiene nor allowing bim o 5 stavgae fon mrs o wo a o tonbio lodi.
when babur seurned to kabul, dt khan expelled his agent from i tn152021, babur once again crosed the indas, and enity captured birs and sutkor, the tia ateways to hindustan, labore also caplulted o b he might have proceeded turther but for the tows of  movct st qundhar, he retrced n s, and after 8 sege of yeurand  half rscaptured qundhar, th ressird, babr as one.
gain bl t0 fom his atestion towars ind.
wasabost s i that dbt roceived en cmbasy from dasiat khan lodi, led by bis o, dilawar kban.
they invited bubur o inds, and.
sugaestd.
that he shouid displace torshim lodi since he was s yrant hat the time wis rpe for bis conquest of he whele of the panjab, i ot o iad sl i 1525, whie babur was st peshanar, b received the news that daulst khas lodi ad ghanged sides g, wo had coleciod an army of 30.00040.000 men, ousted babers mea from siakot, nd war marchis labore.
at baburs approacs, the ar dl kian meked awsy.
davias khan submitied d s pardoned.
thus, within thrce weeks of crosing the tadus, babar became the mastr o the purjb, the batie of paipat 20 agnl 1526 a contic with torahim lo, the rles of del, wasinvitable and babur preparod for it by masching towaeds delli.torbim lodi met babue at panipat with force simated at 100,000 men 42 1000 cephans.
sice the tndian srmies genersly contained large hosdes of servavs, he fghing men on.
iorabis lodi side mast hove oxenfc ks than this sgure.
bt hadcroved he ndow with o force of 12000, but ths had beea swlled by s army i tndia, mnd e large bunber of hindustan nobls and soldins who joined babur iathe punah.
buen then, babars acmy was sumerialy infir.
baber stcogthered ki postion by resting one wing of i wrmy i the ity of panipt which had 2 large nuabe of housts, and protcied the other by meant of 4 it led with branches of ees, t frot,he nshed togther lare umber of cars, 0 40t  defending wal.
between two carts, beastworks were eroted on which soldiers could e e e 450 e babur calle b device sn.
ottomsn rum device, for it adbeen wed by the ottorsans b thee farsous tutle sgaiest shah tamai of iran, babor bad s svured e serice of two ottorsen masier gomnes, ustad al and mustafa.
the wie of gum.
powder had been gradually devloping india.
babue sy that ko vaed it fo the st hme i i stack o3 th fotres of bhirs.
appuretly, guspowde wss known in tdia bt o vae esame.
common is north t from the tims of baburs advert.
toeakin lodi had o idenof the ongly detended posiion of baber.
he bad appa.
fntly expected babus o gkt mobile mode of warture whh was.
sl with he contsl aviaes, making raid advasce or resatiog s he eed arse al skimishing fo seen o eight days, thrahim lodrs forescoms ot for he el batte sesivg e srngih of baburs postion, they beisid.
whie terabim wap sl reorgusiing bisfoces, e two extrme wings of baburs sty wheel e round aad atacked torabias forses from he side and ear.
baburs gonnens v thee guns with od efec from th fret, dot babar bives lar part of the cudit o bis vitory s to s sowmen.
curondy, be mates fte refernce 0 tochins eephants.
apparenty, thrabim bad il ise to e then.
desptthese carlystbacks,iorabms lodfs ammy fought valisaly, the batie raged for twoor tise hours, torabin lodi toaghtt the st with group of 0006000 people sound kim.
1t i esimced that esdes b, mor than 15,000 of bs men were e i he ot the bt of psigo s eparded 5 one of e dece batths of lodian discry.
it broko the back o lodi powes, and.
brought under baburs conrol ke e a3 0p 0 dehi and g, the treasures stored up by terbum lodi in agra rlcved babue from bi sl dflction.
the rich eeitory w to jaumpur o ly open o babar.
howeve, babor bad 0 vage two baifought batle,one agint rana sanga of mewar.sod.
b oher gt theewten afghacs, bfore e couk comoldate ks bold on this area.
viewed from this sngl,the bate of paipat.
wes ot s deciive i the palitca sld 33 b bren made ot s el importanc s i th fuct that it opened s ew phase in the trugle or dommaton s norts indi.
the dificlte of babur e bis vicory  pasipa wer manifol.
masy of e begs wer st pepased.for 3 long.
campaign 1 tndia, with the cuse of the hot weater, heic misgiiogs bad nceased.
they werefuk svuy from bome i  srasge 42 hoste and, babur tlls ve that he people o toda diplyed remaiable bstliy, sbandosing heir vilage o the approach of the mghal srmies.
obviously,the memonis of timurs cking nd plunderog of the towes und vil ges wees el s i el minds.
babur know that the resources in tadin slone would ensble him to foved 4 swong.
pir and saify bis begs.
not fo s the povaty of kabul agsia, be reconds in his gy, ho thos took a firm sand, proclaming bis ntntion to sy 0n n inda, asd.
graoting.
eaoto.a sumber of bis begs who wanted to g0 back to kabul thi immediactly cleared theair.
bt it sio avitd the bowiey of rana sungs who began his prepeesions for howdow wih babur the groving conlct between rana sanga and torahim lodi for the domination of castern rapusthan and malwa has slrady bocn mertioned.
afe defatng mabmud.
khali of malwa, the influce of the rasa had aradually extended wp o pliya khars sl river i the neghbourhood of agrs.
the cstablshment of an empre i the tndo gt valle by babar was threat to rans sanga.
stnga s preparasons sfoo to expel babue or, t any rate, 10 contie him o toe pusib.
babur sceuses rasa sunga of breach of agresment.
he says that sunga had fvited bimto indis, and proised to join bim sgains torhim lodi, but made b0 move whil he qlabor corquered delhi and apr.
we do ot kiow what precite sgeemeat sanga had made.
he migh have hoped for long dravnout warfae guriog which he.
sanga would have been abl o aciethe areashe covted.
or be might bive hoped.
that ke timor, babur would witbdruw after scking delb and weskenig the lodis.
babars decision 0 stay onin tndia compltely chang et siution.
many afghtos, scuding mabmod lodi,  yousger botber of heakim lodi, ralled o tasa sanga, in the hope of repasing the throne of deliin cave sanga won.
hasan kban mevat,the rlerof mewat, sliocat o b ot with sangs.
almost all the raput smooots 1o samss o worth new.
e of ot et contogens 1 v nder e e repuision of rets snge 0d bis ey s s o o b o sl ok 5 bayaa, demorae babarsslders.
to il e, rabar sy e e v s s 100 o o e o the i, e cmpit b the i o s h o bk o doma.
o et st n b wes.
e, ot el 1 purehue o wi g o iom 04 s cooms ko he m, i,y s sk, b el b 1 kbsvws bt 0k g aa 5 p, b b o gl e pegaind tt v v s oo 1 doule rteion g s 1 et o t s 1 nd.
b i st ot the baci of kharwa 1527 was ey conteted.
according 0 babur, sangas focss acecded 20000 incining 10000 alghan cavalymen, and sn equal force selded by fasan ko mewati.
as vsa, hese fgurs ty be greatly exaggeraed, chough babars forts wers undoubiedly inferor fn mumber.
s e oo ks o s gk i almont swsched i however, mughal asery tock  heavy ol of i, 48 slowl, sagsfoces werepushed k. a e jineare, babur.
cedersd his solders in e coten, ho had been shliing behind el tipods, 1o lasnch an iack.the e e ek e s sagom.
sanges fores wer s bems 24 were defeated aftr  grest laghics.
rina sanga xcaped 10d wantd t reew the thus ied oneof the most vallant warrions produce by raunthen.
wth sangs death, the doeas of  unled rajsthas eteding 59 0 agr ceived  srious b, the bacle of kbanws secoed baburs positon in the delliagra rgion.
babar wiragihered bisposition urher by conquer ng e chainof forsgwator, dholpur, o, g of agaa.
ho o semeiad lage ore of awar from hasm khan mewaii he hes ed s curipuign sgsinat ml ral of chasderi i mawa, chasderi was captured m the rajput defenders bad i bt 10 the st man and theie women perormed jauhar, wabue b to cut shrt iy pian of turher campaiges in the area.
0 besing of the growing s e i althowgh the afghans bad ben.
dfeted, ey had ot ben econcid tothe mughal ke eastrn ut pracesh was sl vnder he domisation of the afghen chiels who bad entered thex allegine 1o b but wee prepared to throw it of at any ime.
the atghan ardars wre b bcked by nowst shab, the rler of becgal, who had naried  dusgher of tahin lodi, a nomver of oused the moghl casten riae pradess and eached p to kansuj bt theic greaest weakoes whs the ack of  popula eder.
aflrsome time, mahmod.
lods, 4 beothes of tabis lodi, who had fought sgaion batne a0 kb, mached bisir a the iviatiosof th afghan eades the afghann haled i e el rulr, and mustered g undee b this was threat whieh babar could.
no ipore.
hence, at the beginniog of 1529, e l aps for the cast, cromsag the gnga s bsaras, be fuced the comboed feces o e afghans scd nurae sha of benal o he cresing o the ves ghagrs.
akbough babar 0 crosed the rver, 2ad.
compelied e beigal a0 the afghua emics to s, e could r0t wia 3 decave vietory.
i, asd angious about the situaticn in cenral asa, babur didod 0 patch up an agreemeat with the afghues.
he put forwacd vague clim for ooty overbikar, bot et most o it n the handy o the afgaa ches.he then rturued to agn.
shonly aftervards, whik on his way to kabu, babar died ne lahors.
stgnfase of babars advet oo todia buburs advet into india was sgniteant from maay poats ofview.
fer the st tine sisce the downfull of the kushan cmpite, kabal and qundhac bocame ntegal pars of an cmpirecompeiing north toci.
since thsesres ad slvays cted a8 saging place foran favasion of ndus, by domiating them babur nd s suscemors wee b fo give o tada secualy from extermal nvasons for slsost 200 years.
boooomiallyalso, the conteol of kabul nd quidiae strgthesed indias focign trade soce thes cwo owns wee e aring poins for aravans moant for of the lodis and o the rajpat contedracy ld by rams sangs.
therby, he denrczed e balaco f pover obaining inth ara.
this wes lon sep owards the ctalshment of an alblodia capie, howere, 3 number of condiions bad sl 1o be milled before e cond bs schiced, babur showed what a skilld combination of ariley and cvaley could achieve.
his vitores ed 0 rapld popularmtion of e sy in fadia, ey reduiag the importance of t, babar ltroduced new modo of warfare remr in todia.
allbough gunpoder was known in tndia before, by s new millary methods a8 well a5 by b persosal cosduct, babur reestablsbed the pretge of the crown wheh bad o croded siscs the death of fircx tugisa, although skandar lot ard ibrabi lodi had tried 1o resablsh the prestige of he crown, afghan idea of ribal independence snd equaity had reled m only b ladthe presipe of l of two o the o famous marnon of asia, chasgez and tanur.
none of i nobescould, threloe, clam 4 staus of equality weh kim or aspice o his hrone.
the challnge o bs positien, 1l any, coukd come only trom a tamurid prive.
dabur endeazed sl 10 hs begs by is persocal qualiis ho was aivays prepared o sharethe arahips wih bis sodirt.
onee, at the height of waster, babur vas return.
5 to kabul, the wow was so deep thar orses wouid sk nto 1t and parties of soldiers 110 trumplethe snow so.thatthe horss oul pass.
without bsication, babur jined in the back breaking task.
at ivery s, the smow came up o the waist o tbechest be says.
afiers fow seps, he man i front would be exhuusied, aad another woul fake s place.
when 10,15 or 20 persons had trpied e soowthoxoughly, the alone  horsecould pass over  folowing baburs exsmple, bisbeg aso jolned i the tak.
b was fond of wine nd good compary and was  good and merry companion, at e me time, ho wis 4 ser dicipinacian and  hard askmaster.
he took good care of his e, a0d was prepared to excuse many of thls fuls s lomg as they were not iloyal.
fiowas prepared o adop the same ttitude towarde bis afghan and incan nobies.
hov ever, b did v stk of cruety, probably aberted from s snccsiors, fof e made lowes of skl from the heads of bis oppo s o0  number of occasions.
these, and ke mstances of pecsonal crely, bare o be.
et 1 the content of the hars e n which bt .
thorgh an orthodox sunmi, babar was 1ot igoted o e by the regious diviss.
al 3 ime when.
there was a bitrsctarian foud revee the shias and the sunals s trun 0. teran, s conrt was e from teological e seaion conficts.
thovgh be decared e bt against sanga a ikad and assomed e f ghast afer the vitory, he ressons e clsry plitcal.
though it was  period var, ony 8 fow insances can be found ofdetrosion of temples.
babar vas decply learned i p and acib, and s regarded as onc of the to mout fumous weter i the torksh langiage which wis i mother fongac.
a3 8 prose et o bad no equl, and be famous meros,the tueu bt s consderd ane ofthe ciasics of workd ftraure.
his otber ok clude.
masma sad the torkish ranlaion of welkacwn sut work, he was o foueh wih the famous poct and artss of e time.
and.
desribed their works in memoi, h was  keen paanli, and gcrived the flora asd fama of tndia in comdeable detail thus, baburinteoduced a ewconcept of 1he saie which wab to be bused on the sungth and prescige ofthe crown, abense of ligiows 4o sectarin bigey, and the st foirng of cultore 2ad th fne arts e thun provided 8 precdent 0 a irction o bis sucessors.
hamtyass congoest of gejrat and b tusle i she shan fumayus succended babar fa desember 1530 3 the youag age of 2. he bad 1o b arupple wih  mber of problems if ebind by babur.
the admisisration ad sot yet boen comolidied, and e snanees ve precaions.
the afghans bad notbeen s ducd, and wee ursiog the hope of expeling the moghle from tndia.
finaly, here wat the tmurid egy of pationig the emphe amorgal th brotbrs.
babur bad comscled hurmsyun to dal medly with his brotbers, but had sot favoured the partdniag of the nfust maghal copice, which would.
have b disasrous.
when humayun ssended the throne agrs, the empirefcloded kabol 12d qundiar, whiethre was oo conrel ove badakbibic beyond the hindukush moustine.
kabal asd qundhar wee uader te charge of homeyurs yousges brothr, kamras, 1t was ocly atsra hat they shoold remain i b harge.
howeer, kumean was ot siisfid vit thes povetyrihes ares.
te marshed ca labore and moltan, sndoxcupidthe.
humayun, who was ey lewhere, snd g bt want o tart a civl war, had ll opicn butto e kamran accepied th sseaiory of humiyus, and promised 1o bep hin wheaever necsiry.
karsraas sction cesed he spprebension that the other broders of homeyoe might also folow the same puth whenever  opportuity srose.
howee, the grasting of the pusib and mukanto kanran had the advantage hat humeysn was free to devote b ttenion o b caerm e vithout having o botber shout s seten fronties.
apart from these, hamayun hadto del with the rapid growta of e power of he afghann i heea, a0 the growing smep of cosquests of bahadur shah, the riler of gujart.
a th ovte, homayes wes inlised 40 considr the afghas danger 9 be he mere seriousofthe two.
i 152, at  p cald m e datab, e defeate the afghsn forces which which be named dispansh.
he orpanised b conqueted bikar and overun jauogor many grsd.
feuss asd festiviin during the i castern uttar pradesh.
after s succss, peiod.
hmayen, bas bee blamed for wast humayvo beskged chusar.
thia powerful g valusble timea theweactivites, while fort commanded thelnd and.the tivr route sher khan wasseadily augmenting bis powes between agra and thecut, asd v koown o the cut, tt bas aho been ssid that a8 the gateway of castrs tadit, it had humeyus nacivity was doe to bis babit of recely come i the possesson of sn afghan takisg opium.
neither of these charges bas sasac, shr kb, wbo bad become the most much substae.
babur contioued 10 me powerfl of he afgban sardars.
opium e he gave p wine.
humeyun ste afc the sige of chusar bd gose on for opium oscasionaly i pisce of o in addition fout months, shes kb pervuaded huoayun o wine, 8 id masy of his moble.
but o allow bis 0 etain posesion o the fort, ncither babur sor humiyun was an opives in mtu, he promised to be loyal to the addice the buiding of dinpanah was memnt maghals dnd et oue of is ccs o humeyun 10 mpres freods sad.
foes .
1 coud 24 botage.
humtym scorpted the ofer aliosrve as 3 second.
captalin case agra becaune he was ssslous 1o utum 1o agra, was hrestened by bahudur shab who, in the rapid incrasc i the power of baadur the meactime, had canquered ajmer aad shah of gujara, sod b sctvies the aess  overran esster rajusths.
bordriog aga, had alumed bim.
he wis babadue shab ofired s sl greate chal dot prepared 1o conte the ege of chuae enge 0 humayus.
not content with hagbour.
under the command of  noble sisce that ing th relations of irsbim lod at his court, would bave meant dividing bis forces.
e openly welsomed some clos relations of babadur shab, who was of ainost the humayum who bad sscaped from peison, same age 4 homayun, was an bl and ambi.
bavisg been conined the alter a5 wnsoccen tous .
asceoding tho trove m 1526, fol ebellon.
fnaly, babadur shah agan be bad overun aod oquered malwa, hoinvested chitor.
simuitancousy, be suppiied the arsed 10 rajstsan and bsiege chitor  arns and men to tatar khao, a comin of a0d sounreduced the rajpt defenders to soro theshin lodi, to invade agra with o fome s, acconding o some laer kegeads, of 40000 whil diversions were fo.
be made rani karnavat, the widow of rasa sesga, ia the norh asd the sant.
seet s ok to humayun weking s belpand hmayun casly defested the challoge fomayiagulantly respoaded.
while his posed by tase khan.
the afghun forces sty cannot be flly accpted, it i rue that meled awey at the spproach of 1he moghab.
from apa humeyun moved o gulior to tatur khars small force was defeated and wah the siation.
due 1o the far of b bumsel was kiled, determined to end the maghal ioterventios, bahadur shab patched threa fom baadur s ice once for s, upatiesty wih the russ, lsving the fort s humayun now isvaded malws, ho marched bia handsafe extacting 3 are indemniy inforward skowly and cautiounly, aed occepied s cut and kind.
positon midvay batween calttor nd mands.
durin te ext year and a alf, humayon he thes cut of bahader shah.
trem matws.
speat st i buiiog cew ity sear dk, bahadur shah quikly compelled.
chitor strugol ron birins i north dda to capitalate, iacgely doe o bis e artlery which wascommanded by an ottoman master g, romi khss.
i has beco said that hamayun refused 0 belp chittor due o rlglous consderstons.
however, mewat it at that ime passingthrough s e i s, from humayaas poa o view, miltary vlue s an aly was liite, in he struggl which followed, humayua.
howed consdersbie miltary sk, 4nd .
markable personal valosr.
babadur shah ad not dare face the mughals, fo sbai doned b fortifed camp and fed 1o masd e spiing s gona, bt leving sehind sl i ih equipage.
hurmayus was bt on bod.
hoscled the foraess of masdo wit amall party, being the fith mas to cter.
bahador shah ed from mandu to champa e, then fo abmadabad and flly 0 kaibiawar.
thos, the rh provnces of malva .
gujart, a0 wll a0 he lagge resure boardod by the gujarat ruls at manda and chumpaner, el ito the hards of homayun.
both gujarat and malwa vere lost s quickly as they bad beenganed.
afe the vetory, humayus.
placed gujars underthe command o his younger broter, askan, and then rticed o mandu whih was cemrally ocatod 0d esjoyeda e climate, the msjor problem wasthe dep atach et of the people 1othe gujarai rie.
adar was experinc.
o, and the mughal nobls were mutully dided.
a senes of populc upeisings,the mlltary wctions by bakadur shaks nobles, e rapid sevival of bahadas shalfs power, mnerved asarl, ho fell bak upon champs.
er, bt rceed 50 help from the commander o te fot who doubted b istestions.
unwiliag to face humayun at mands, be docded o reum to ages, thu immedistely nised the fear that he might try to dplice humayua from agr, o atempt o carve out 1 a separate empie for bmslf.
decidng to ke no hances, humayun shandooed matws and moved atte askan by forced.
marchn.
ho overiook adkan in rajusthan the two brothers were rconcied, ard etured to agrs.
meazwhile, both gujkratand malva.
were st the gjarat campaigh vas notacomplte fullue, wil 1 did 0t add 10 the moghal erntories, 1t decored forever the threst posed o the mughals by dahadur shab fomayin was now .
posiion to soncen ate al i resoures 1 e srvggle agnin sher khan and the afghans.
the death of bahader shah 1 4 scuflewiththe porte guarat.
dunity humayus sbooce from agn february 1535 to february 1557, sher kb ad furtber stragthened i postion.
he had made hamsell the.
snquestonsd.
mster of dibar.
the afghans from fur and sar had ralled sound bim.
thogh be contavedto profess oyaly o the mughas, be syvemats ally plansed o expelthe mughals rom i, he was inclose touch wi bahadur shah who had helped i with vy sbucie.
thete feourcts enaed hm o et and.
mantin lrge and eficint army which icloded 1200 clepbants.stertly sfer humsyors rtom 0 agis, e bad used this ary to efat the beogal ing, snd compe i o pay 3a nden.
ity f 1,300,000 diars gld can, after equippimg  new army, humayen marched sgat sher khan and besegal chunar toward the end of theyea.
hamay 1t would be dungerous o lave sucka powerfl fort behind, thesteng b e of communcations, howewer, the fort srongly defended by the afghars.
despite e bt e by e matergunncr, rat  kb, it tack six worths for humayun gaptete 1. tn the swanvhile, sher khn apuured by cashery e pametol fort of roias waere he coud jawe i famiyin aty e then mvaded begal for scond time, nd cpturd g, s capis.
thus, sher khan compltely outasoes vered homaysn.
hamaysn should.
have telaed that b was s 10 poson o oftr itary chabesge to sher khan wihout e e preparutions.
hoveve, ve w natie 1o arp the polieal wxd mibtary usuon facig m. after isvtory over gaus,sher khas made an o hormayin that he would suresder bhar and ay a1 sanual taete of e akhs of doars i be ae sowed to e beaga.
t ot clear row far soer khan was sscere n making v efer.
but harayin was .
prepared o tave bengl o swr khan.
bangal wit the lnd of g0, s i mamfucares, and 3 sento o foags trade moreove,the king of benpl who hd rached humayuns carpin  wounded condton, urged bt resstunelo sher kh i il concmsing.
al tese tactons led humayun to roget sher khans off o dcide spon.
campaig 0 bengal.
soonafer, the bengal i succumbed 10 wounds.
hameyen bad, ths, 1o undesake thecampaignto begal i alon.
humayens march to bogal was prpor e, 130 was the prelude o e guaster which overtadk b army ot chava almost o joar oer, sher khan bad ftbengal 309 oot bibar.
he et humsun livasce it bengal withous oppostion 10 ot be mght darup homayurs commu mtions o4 botle him up i bengl.
artiviog 2t guar, hamayn.
quickly 00k ept 9 cablh b sod order, dot this aot avo say of i probems.
his stuation was e worte b the atemptof s younger broter, hundl, tosssumethe crov bimsef atagrs, due fo this and sher khas seti vi, homayen wes totally cut off from.
sl news and supphes from aga.
afee 4 sy of three g0 four months at gaur, humeyun sarted back for apm, leaving s smal garmson.
behund.
despie th rumblings of dicorient i the nobiy, the uryseon, nd the consant barryng ticks of the afghans, humayun managed 1o gt bis my back 1o chasen sear without oy serious lose.this was 8 big chievement tor which umayus desrves credi mean whie, kimran b dvaseed.from lahore o ol hundal ebelion ot aprs.
thogh ot dioal, kamzan made 50 steapt to.
esd reforcenents to humayun.
theee might well v swung he miltey balanc i favone of the maghal cspi these scbacks, humayun was sl conddent of sccessagarst sher khan, he torsot that he was fucing an afghua srmy whih was vy diflerent from the one  ear before 1t had pined bt xperence and condence under the leadership of the most wkini poer e afpsns cver produced.
mised 55 an ofer of pese from shes kban, humayun crosed 1o the sasern bark of the karmnasa s, gving ful sope to the afghan borsemen sacsmped there, humayn showed not caly bad poltesl sense, but bad genealbip as well he chose hit grouad badly, sad sowed il o be.aken humayun saely escaped wih s e from the bt seld s sctor th river with e bl of  watercarlr.
inmense hooty 6l in ster knans bands.
about 7000 maghal soldirs and many prominent sobls were il a e dfea st chaues mareh 1599, only the fullet uaity among.
the timurd rnces and.
the nobis could have savd he fravgole fon ere n nokth doia mughalskamran bad 8 botle bardened force of 10000 mughals under bie command a1 agra.
butbe was not prepared 1o lounthem 10 humsyon 18 be had lon contdence in humayuas lesdeshp.
on the otber band, homaym was ot prepared fo eiaust the command of he srmiesto kamrun, it the atier v 1t 15 ssume power bimselt, the suspiclons beween the brothers grow tll karoran dcided 0 return o labore with the the army b at agra was no mach against sher k. towever,th bati of kanauj may 1540 was biiry conested, bothth youegerbeothesof hmaysa, atkarkasd hisdal, fought valiodly butto o wall.
the batle of kanauj decded the sue bet ween sher kiua and the mughals.
humsyun how became prisce ithout akingom, kabal and quidhar remarning snder kameun he wandered shout n sindh aod s seghbout.
ing countie or thenext o and half years, hatching various schemes 1o egan b ing.
dom.
but nether the rers of sindh ne maldeo, the povedtul ulr of marwar, s prepure to el bir in hi enterprise.
worse, i ows brotbers tomed sgainst him, and tied 0 have him killed or impeisoned.
huroayun faced sl these tnals and.
teibulatons with forutude and courags, it was dariog thia peod that humayuas charucier showed iselt atior bt uitimatly, humayun took shlle atthe court of the ramas king, and recapiured qundbar and kabul with b help s 1545 i s e that the major cawse of humayass fulur agaast sher khan wr inabiliy o understand tbe satuce of the nfghan pover.
due to the existence of e aumber of afghen tibs satiered over sorth tdin, the afghans could shways reite wnder capable kendr 1ad pose s challnge.
with s outvinning over the ol ulrs aod ami i 10 thew side,the mughals wer boundte remai umericaly ifeioe.inthe beganing, humayun was, on the whol, eyally servd by his brothers resl dlleaces mosg them srose only afe st khary vitore.
some hisorans have undoly exeggersed the cary difirnces of hemayn with hs brothes, and his alieged tasls of haracter, thovgh not vigorous a8 babur, humayunthowed himall 1o be competent genersl and palit can, il bis concaved benpa campaige.
i bk the batds wih sker khan, the later showed imslf a superor eneral.
humayens 1 was 8 romaste ore. he went from riches o ags 4d sgar from ags fo nehes.
tn 1555, followsg the breaksp of the s empue, be was b to rcover dethi.
buthe id no v lng o csjoy he froisof the victoy.
he died from 4 fl from the st loor of the bbeary bulding in bis fot at delhi.
hs avourite wie buit 2 magi bocat mausoeus for b ses the fort.
this buiding marks 2 new phase io he sile of architeture 1, nordh idin, s mosremark bl feature beng the magaitosa dome.
made of marble.
shershab and b ser enpine she shah sscended he throne of dl at thesipeage of 67. we do ot know mech bout his acy lfe.
his orgisl name was farid and his faher was smalljagdar at jnsnpur.
fanu scquted rch admunutzative xpennee by lookiag afier theaffurs of iy fthers age.
folloing the defest and death of thrabim lodi aad the confusion iz afghan s, b vyl 4 one of the most impor.
ot afghan sadars the e of see kban was guven o hum by s patro for kling g e soon, sher k emeraed s the righ hand of e rule of bihar, and s mastr a al but name, this was efor the death of babur, the rse of sher khan to proninesce ws, thos, not sudden ava uler, sher shah uld.
the mightist ampire which had come into cxsience dorth indi sice the e of muhammad b toghiaq.
his ampise extnded.
from bengal tothe tndus, xcodiog kashic.
t the west, e conguered malws, and almost the enure .
malwa vas then in weak and dmeactedconduion and s o position to ofer any ositancs.
bt he situate in rajashan o diflcnt.
makdo, the sl of marwar who had tscended the gadds n 1532, had fapidly bovght the whole of wester and onthers rajasthan under bis control he.
funberexpanded his terorie durmg hemuyess contict with sher shah, wath the hep of the bhats of jsatmer, ho con queced ajme.
o his carer of conques he game st contict with the rlr of the sees, ochuding movar his ltetact had been the conquet of bikaner.
in the course of the contic he mler was kiled afte 2 gallnt reistance.
i sons, kalyan das snd b, fought shelier at the court of sher shab.
many otbers, chcing hsrlaion, biam deo of mert, whom he had disposessed from bis jagr, lso repared to sher shals covrt, thus he itation fcing rana sanga and.
babug wasrepeted, maldeosatempt o create alge centraned sate i rajasthan vnder his egs was bound1a b regarded 8 s thrat by he reer of delhi und agra.
t wasbeheved it maldeo had an army of 50,000, howevr, thee 1 10 evidenc that maldeo covted delhi o agra.
now, s before, tse bone of conten tion betweethe wo.
was the dommation of the sraegkaly mportant caster rajusthan.
the rajputand afghan fores cashed st suml 1549 between ajmer snd jodhper.
sher shab had adopted the.greate prscan.
ons whie advancing o rajuthan st every sape he would throw up entrenchments 10 guard agunst 1 surpnse attack.
1l is lear hat the rajputs, 100, had leart a lot about ey acin since rans suagas disstzons batie i babur.
they refused to stack the srongly forufld position of she shab, after waig fo abost s month, maldeo suddenly wibieew towasds jodhpur.
according to contemporary wrters, his was due to.clever sestagem on th part o shee shah.
he bad dropped.
some lrers addresad o the rajput commanders near makdeos camp, .
order s dowbt in bis mind.
about ther loyaly.
the ruse worked, maldeo scing his mistake when it vas oo lte.
some rajput sardars efused 10 rerest.
with snall forceof about 10000 they wigorously atacked.sher shabs centre and croated confuslon i1 bis army.
but sher shu kept cool.
soos, superio numbers and afghan guncie halied the rajput charge surcounded, the rajputs diod sghtog to the st man.
many afghan soldiers perehed with them.
the batlle of samel sdled the fate of rajasthan.
sbee shab now besieged and cone querd ajmer and jodhpur, foring maldeo oo the desert.
e then, tursed.
towards memsr, the rata was in 70 pesiton to resat, and sent the keys of chiior to sher siah who et up bs ostposts up fo mount abe thus,in  bre perod of en moaths, sher shah overan simot the ntire rajsthan.
his last carosign wos sgainst kalimar, szon fort tha wi th key o bundelkhand.
during e sige,  gun burst and severly imured shec shab, he died 1549 after e heard that the tt bad been ceptured st shab was suoceaded by s second.
son, tam shab, who ruled gl 1553, iam shah was o capable ruler andgenersl, but mest of his encrgies wero oscupied with the tehllions raed by i brothers, and wih eial feuds smong the afghess, these and the everprosen foar of o resewed moghal invsion prevented slarm shah from atteoping t0 sxpani his empure.
his deathat a yourg sge ed 10 a vl war smong his succesors.
this provided humayn the opporturity he had e scking for tecovring his empre in tn o hoty contested atts i 1555, be defested the afghaas, and recovered delhi and aga.
the sur caprs may be consdeed n many.
ways s contisuation end calmination of the dabi sularat, the advent of babur and hamayun beog in the netare of an ater regnun.
amongs the formost ontbstions of sher sha was his recsablishrent of law 3 onde acron the jongih nd breadth of his empire.
e dealt stemly wih robbers snd dacolt, and with zamindaes whorefued to ey i torsaue o diobeyed the ordss o tha governmant, wo tes told by abbas kban sarwas, the histodan of sher s, tht the amindats were 0 cowed hat none of thom e 0 s o sanaer of ebclion ageist him, or 1o moed the el pating uough thee erioris,  shic shal paid gret ateston o the foss ing of trade and commerce 4nd the improve.
mectof communications in his eagdem.
sher sheh restored the o imperial roud clled e grand truok road, rom.
the rivr indus in the west 0 sonargaonis bengal he a0 bull  roadfrom agra to jodpar snd chitor, xidnty lnking vp with the roud to he gujrat sespors.
he builia third road from laboro o moltan, mulan was st that lime the stagrg pont for caravazs ol to west sod cestral asia.
for the convesi.
enceof travellers, she shah bkt  sarai 3 3 disanceof every to kos sbowt sight km on these rosds.
theseri s ftfid loding or i whers tavelers coud pas the ight asd.
o keep thele goods n safe eutody.
separate todgings for hindus and mushms were peo vided in these s, brahmanas were appainted for pronding bed a5 food to the hindu.travells, aad gain for theiehores.
abbas khan says, it was  ol in these sarae hat whoover eniered them rceived provison sutabe to bs rank, and food 434 titterforvis cate, from government.
bfors were made to st villges around the sarss, t was e apart .
these villags forthe expenses of the saais.
every sarat had sevezl witchines under the cantrol of  shabon ctodion.
we a1e 0l that sher shah buit 1700 sarsis mall.
some of these are sl exiting, whieh shows how strong they were.
histoady and saais have becn called the sreries of the enpre.
they helped 1 quckenag trade and commerce in the cosatry.
masyof the saras devloped oto marketowns gesba to which peasuts focked 10 sell tel prodece.
the saris et iso uied 8 stags forthe ewsseric o dakchowki, the organsation of these dakchowkis ha been described i 30 cutcschapte.
by messs of thse she shab 1 gt il nformsd of he developments in b vt empee.
shee shak iz trodced aher rfors 0 promote the rowih of tode snd commerce.
i i mpie,goods psid costoms.
gty only at two lacesg00ds procuced n be crimpared from outde pad custons duty st he sorder of bengal and bbar at siri b, md goods come, from west snd cntra at pud costoms oty ot the t, o ane was somed oiy customs i roads, i o towes amyhere e, the doty wa ekt scond et the i of sl sher sha irectd b governorssnd amis 0 compe the people 10 st marchants s trvells el i crery way, i not o barm e atall.
i 4 marchen e, they wee ot 10 sz b goods as 1 they were smowned.
shrshah sjoned upos the the dctus o shikh nizam 1 3 machat shouid die in your country i1 3 pecidy o lay bands on i propert.
ster shah made the local vilage hadine mapadiams nd.
zamindars tepoasile for sny loss et the merchant snflred on the roads.
i the goods wer soen, he mapsdins and the zyndars hd 10 pro e then, o o ot cut the havats of the havs o fighway robbr, g whih they ad to undergo the  pemshment meant for hevesand robbers.
thesame b s sppled in cass of murders o theroads.
tt was s buctarous v to cake the oset espons.
bl for the wicked but i sees 1o bae besn elfctiv.
inthe.
pictureaqe lasguage of anbas sarwari, s decrgit o woman.
might plce 8 baseiul of god oreamests on her b and g0 on  jourcy, 04 20 bl o1 robber wouk come ncsr et for furof the pusishment which sher sha.
afcted.
the cumocy nforms of sher sha slto betped i the rowth of commere 2. hendl.
crfle.
he sk fine comsof g, iver e and copper of uniform sandard.
i place of the debased coms of mixed metal.
his sver fupee s s0 well exccoted thit i remained  sandard cain for centuries sfer him.
his ttcopt 1o fx sandard weghts and meaures il ver the mpire wers slo.
beipfl for tade nd commerce sher shah 6 not make mesychanges in the sdmicratve divisions reveling sine the sultasat period a sumber of villges som prised pargans.
the pargan was under the charge of the skigdar, who looked afir aw and oder and enersl adimisteation, e e minsi o emil who locked aftr the ollecton of nd revenve.
.
accousta wers maintaised both in the persan and thelocl lingusgss hindav.above the porgana wa the shig or sarker under tha charge of tho shigdarlskg.
rn nd 8 munsfdminton, it seems that orly the deignation of the officers wer new since both pargana and srkarwere it of sdmitration i the el pericd lso.
a mumber of takars were grovpedisto proveces, but e do not know much about the patter of proviecial admimstration in sher shats .
1 eems that the provicial govemers were sllpowerfl i some ress, inome area such a5 beagal, real power o mned in the hands of tnoal chits and the sovemor excrcied cnly loote control over them, sher shah sppareatly continved the cental mackiery of sdmmistration whih had been developed during the sultanst period.
how.
ever, we do ik have much nformation.
about o sher shab did ot favour leaving 100 much authaity n the hands of minsters, ho workedexsendiogly bard, dovoting bimucf to he e o the tate rom ealy morsing to late st right.
ho siso toured the country constanly to keow thecanditon ofth peopie.
but 20 sagle ndividual, bowever herd work.
oo fon e i sorte 1ol g, coud ook afte all the afirs of 2 vest ity ko ladia.
sher shilsexcesive cenaaton of suthorty in bis hands wis cource of weskaew, and itsbarsful i becime apparent when  masterul sovereigs e bim coued o ut on the frosny sher shab puid specal atenticn 10 the lnd revenue sy, the army and jusce.
having admisitred b fobers o for  umber of years, a0d then a the viral uler of bina, shr shah knewthe working ofthe t reveaue system o ail e, with the belp of a capble team of adaministator, e toned vp the enise system.
the produce of tnd was o jomg o be based on gaess work, or by divding thecrops i the felds o cnthe hebing foor.
sher shab insisted on mea uremet of the sown and.
schedle of ates aled ray was drawn up, layog dows the sates shate of the diflrent ypes of crops.
thi coud then he converted into cadh on 1h.
s of thepreviling market raes is dillcent lrea.
the dhare o th sate was oethrd of the produce, the lands were divided nto oo bd snd mdding, thesr average prodice arcomputed, and onetisd of t breame the thare of the wate.
the peasats were g he option of payg i cash or kand, the th st prefred cas thus, after soving hecrops, he pessant kmew bow much he had to pey to the siate.
the e son, the type of cropsculvaed, snd.the smount esch peasant had 10 pay wai witen down 0 a paper called pata nd each pessant wis nformed of  no one was slowed to charge from the peasants anyihing fata, bven the ate which the members of e messuring pary wereto get fo thei work et 1 down.
i onder o guaed againt 1 wat o evied.
sher shah was very soliou fo the wel fureof the pessntry he used tosey, the culuvators arelameles, they sobait o those in pove, ad i 1 oppres e they wil hanon ther vlages, and he cconty will b uined and desertd, s 1t il be 3 b, time before secomes prosperons.
sine thre was lenty of nd avaiabe forculiva o i hose days, th doserton o vilages by he peasunts 0 cse of oppresson was redl thicat and heiped i putig  it o the explitation ofths prasants by the rulers.
sher shal sstup srcng aemy 1 order o adavnstec b vastempic.
he dipansed with trba lenes undec el chefs nd re cruited soidlens drecy, aher venfyreg.
theie charcter, every sobdier bad s desriptive ol cheks soarded, and i bore sranded it the mpera ga 0 hat borss of aleior quaiy may not be subsouted sher st s 0 havs bawed this sy, known 5 the dagh esaaime syst, fom themiltary eforms of alasddin khuls.
the sirengthof tocks o bows, 5000 lphants and park of sy, ho st up cantonmnts n leret s ofthe erpire e  srong gativen s posted s cach of them.
shor shah placed consderabe emphss on jutce.
he usod tosay, jouie i the mostexcalontof rlgiows rits, snd s ke by the g ofdels and of he fat.
ho did tot pare oppresers whethe thy vece high nobes, e of i ove ribeor neae reaiors.
quis e appoined a vt places or jusice but, i before, the vilige puhaysts ued zamindas sho deste with givk and cripiaal cass .
the tocal el a big stp forward n the dspensation of justin was, however taken by sher shas son e successo, ll shab.
t shah codi s the laws, thes doing amay with the ooy of depeading cn  special st of people who could nterpret the ieamic aw.
i shah sbo trd tocurb the powers and.
prviges of the nobes, and 1o pay cashala e toslders.
bt mostof the regulations disappeared wih s death.
there is 0 doubl tat sher shah wss  remaclabl fgore, he ctabished 3 sound ostem of admnistraion n i brifresps of sveyerrs, hewasssoa grat buider.
tho tomb which he built forhimself at sassram during i leme s regarded a ane of the masterpices of ardhiecture, 101 considersd 52 calnination o the earlirsyle of archi fecture and a starng pont for the new sty which develoed lte.
shee shh alo buit 4 rewcty on the bark of the yamuna rear delhi.
the sole suvivor of this 1 the oid fort purana qi and the ine mosque wilki t. shee shab alo patonisd the eaoe al do soe of the finest works in hinds, such a the padnarar of mok mubaromad jaii, were complted during i regn.
shee shah was not a bigot i the rellgons sphece, a i evident from s social and sc0 soms poley.
neither s shab nor he depende on the ulama, though they respec ted then a geat deal.
relgous slogas were sometimes used to justily poliical actoss.
the wcacherous murder of paran mol and bis associates aftr ho had vacated the fortof raisc in malwa on th bass of  binding csth inone such exsmple.
the theologiars rled that 20 fuith need b kept with an indde and that parsa mal had oppressed.
muslim men and women.
sher shab dd sot, bowever, te any new ibera polices.
jisyah osti ued tobe colketed.
from the hindus, whis s nobility was drawe simost excusively from the atghas thus thestate under the sursrensined a0 afghan institution based on race and tribe.
a fundamenta change came about osly with the emergence o akbar, exercises 1. destie the politial developients that took placs in central asi in the perod beween e death of t asd th conguest of kabul by baber.
e reasonsfon humayuns ure.
discus tho signiicaac of the batle of p desribe uhe contctbetwecn humayon and sher shah and explen e 1526, 4. descnbethe administative efors of shee shak.
wit seps did b sdopt to promoe e growth of rads sad commerce 1 chapter xitt consolidation of the mughal empire age of akbar waey hoses was rmeng fom bikaner, howos gallnty offered sheler and help by the rana of amarkot.
it wasat amarkt, n 154, that akbar, th gratet of the mughal ruers, was born.
when hamayon d 0 tran, young kb was captored by s uncle, kamrae.
he resied e child wel, ak was reanied with s parets afie the capture of qundhar.
when humayun died, akbar was at kal sour i the poriab, com.
manding opeations sgaist the afghan rebls ther.
he was crowned ot kalunwsr m 1556  the young age of thirteen years and four monthe, akbar succonded to 2 diffcut poston.
the afghans weie sull stiorg beyond agre, wd were regrouping their forces under the teadership of hemu for  faal showdown, kabul had been tacked and.
beseged.
sikander sor, the defsted afghan roler, wes loiteing in the svesk hil, however, bairam kban, the tote of the pritce 34 loyal and fuvourte ofiar of humayun.
rose o the oca sion.
he bocame the waki of the kingdom, with the e o khrkhavar, and raled the moghil forcs.
the threat from the side of hemu was consdered the most senoss, the e from chanar 0 the borde of bengal was under the domnation of a shah, a nephew of sher shah.
hemu, who bad strted ife peintendent of the markets vader eam st 1ad raply s under adh shah hebad nt s g o ofte tcstywo bates .
whh he dad fought adi shah 1ad sppencd i the weie with the e of vikramije,and entrosed iy w he sk of explng hc moghib.
hemw captred a, and with a1 amy of 50000 caviley, 0 el phasts and o rong park of atlery marched ipoa del t 0 welconested bare, hemu dfeted he mugils ne deli and cepied e iy.
irem kb took carpetc sps 10 mect the siuaten.
fis boid and gt newheat o is army, snd i marched on delh before hemu cold have fime 10 comseldate s posiion.
th i bebwen themughals 94 e afghan forces ied by hemn, took plce once sga at pt 5 novwnber 155, alhough hemis axlery had ben caplred e by a mgl detach e, the e of bale was in fovour of hema whea 3n arrow bt im .
the ye and he el theleadrns afghan amy was e hems was captured and .
this, akbar had vieusly to ecomques i empie.
faly phasecomest with ihe nobity asseen baitam khan semaioed ot the el of 12 sfais of the cmpre for ot fout yescs.
daring the peiod, hekep the nobly fully st contc the dange o kabul was avert e, wndth tariories of he empue wee v eaded from kabal up 1o jaupur o the cast 0 agsar ntho st galice s capored, e vigorous efors vere made to conaser rnthembhor and mabvs.
mesavhik.
aliac was spprosching the sgeof matoriy.
bairam khan fd ofteded many powertlpersors wile he held sup teme power, they complaied that bewam k was  sha, 10 that he was appoit.
ug s own supporiers and shies 10 hgh ey whie neglecing.the oldnobles these charges were not very serionsin themelves but b khan bad become arrogant, nd faled 0 e hat axbar was growing .
there wat frcton on small pauts which e akbas el tha he coud noteave fhe aus of fhe sate n someons ches s orary engch of time.
n payed his cards defy.
he et agrs o the pestes of hntio, 424 resched el from dl he iswed o forman dis missng bairm khan from his ofcs, and llng upon all he nobles o come ard ub mit 1o m peronaly.
onee baram khan e that a wasad 1o take pows in 51 own hasds, be was prepared fo submit, but s opponits wereeen to.ruin him they heaped humiliaion pon him g e 1 seuded to el the rebelion dstracted h i for atmost six mosths.
fieally, s kban vas fored to bt akbar rsnel him condally, and gave hum the option o serving t e court o amywhere ouide w, o1 einog 10 mecca.
buram kimn chose 10 g0 10 meccs.
however, on hi vay, be was asasnated ot patus sear almadabad by an afghan who bore i s pero grodye.
baeuas wile 40d hid were browgh to akbar at agra.
akbar married berun khans widow who was bis cous, 0d brovghe  the child as s owa fon.
ths chid latr became famous as abise rahum kbani khasan s held some of the most fmportant offcs a0d commands e cmpic.
akbars confrontation with bairam khan and the tretment scsorded 10 his family sub sequstly show some ypical trats of akbars chascte, ho was vnrcleting once he bad made up s mind about a course of action, it was prepared to 0 outof his way a being bencrous 0 an opponent who had sobmitied tohan.
during bawzm khars robelion, groups and.
indinduls in he nobilityhud become policaly sctve.
this included  akbars tosermether, maham asag, and ber reac cons.
though miham anaga.
soon with drew from police, het son, adham khan, wasan impetoous young man.
he asumed independent afs when sent 0 command an expediton gains mabwa.
removed from the commund, he lud caim to the post of the i, snd when.
s was not conceded, be stabhed heacting weri in i offoe.
akbar was enrsped snd had him theown dow from the prapetof the fort s0 that e died 151, howerer, it was many years before akber was g0 wtabish his auibority full, the usheks formed 3 powerful group m the o billy.
they held important posiions s castern utar prades, biha and malva.
allhough they hadserved the empre el by subding the povertl afghan groups in those aress, they had tecome srrogunt and were defyig the young rulr.
beoween 1561 and 1567 they broke out i rebllion several imes, forcing akbar 1o take the feld against them.
fach gime albar was mduced o pardon them.
when they aguin rebelld n 1565, akbar way cosoumatin 0f the mughal puras 50 exasperated that b vowed to male jaumpur his capital i he had rooied them out.
mesnwiie,  rebllion by the miezas, who were tumurids and were relted to akbar by marriage, thiew e areas west of modern uttar pradesh into confoson.
encouraged by thee rebelion, avbars halfbrodher, mian hakm, who had sezsd contrl of kabul, advasced into the punjah, and.
besieg e lihore, the usbek rebes formaly pro cimed hum the e thiswas the most serious enis akbar had o fuce snce hemuscapture of delh.
how ever, akhars gt and  cerain smount of 1ok cnabled b 4o trmmps.
from jaun pur he marched 1o lubore, foremg mirrs fiakim to.
reire.
moarwhi, the febelion of the mazas was crushed, the mirzas fleeog.
fo malwa ad thence to gojorat.
akbar marched back from lahore 1o taurpur.
croaing the sver yamusa near alishabad at the height of the rainy seaso, be surprsed the rebls e by the uk nobles nd comp ledy fowed them 1567, the usbek aders were killed v the bttle,thus bringng the protracted reselion to 41 end.
al the ebelions noties,cluding those among them who had been dreamung of independence, were cowed down.
akbar was now fr o concen.
rte on the xpansian of the cmpite.
ary espansion of the empire 155670 during bairum khrs regecy, the terni toie of the mughal empi had.
b expand.
ed.apast from ajmer, the mostmporiant conquents during this peciod had been of mawa and gurhkatinga.
malwa was being ruled, ot that tume, by  yousg prince, 1w bez bahadur.
his sccomplshments inclded a mastry of muse and posry.
stories sbout the romssce o dax bahador 12d rep mats, who was famoss.for her benutyae wel a5 for masc aed posey are wel knowa.
dur 1. it mando had becom n cdbrated cente for mase the army.
hovever, bad been eglected by bez babadur.
the expedi o aghast mabwa was led by adham khas, son of akbars fostermarber, naham ansga.
baz bahadur was badly deteed 1561 snd e mughals ook valusble spibs, nchding rupmat.
however, she prfered to commit sucide to beng dragped o adhamkhans darem, duc to the senles crcles of advam khan and hus succesr, there was  rescton agaist the moghals whieh casbed bz buhadur o secorr malwa.
afer destog with basram khans rebl tion, abar st nother expediion o malwi.
bz bahadur had 10 i, and for some time be ook shefer with the rans of mewar.
after wandering abeut from owe dres o anatber, e fnally seprived o akbars cout and was enolled w1 4 mughlmasiahdort the vt courry of malwa thus came under moghi rut,  ahout the same time, mughal arms overran the ingdom of garh katungs.
the kingdom of garhkatanga incloded the narmada valey and the northern portions of present madhys pradech, it had becn welded opeher by one aman das who flourihed in the sesond el of the ifeenth cntury.
aman das hd belped bahadur shah of gujarat i the sonquest of rssen and had recived frem hie th e of sangram shah the kingdon of garhxatasga ichuded s n t .
e vt b s 4k ui e o v comor, wepma, s s bl 1. rumberof gond and rapst pisipais, it asthe ot powerfl kingdon et up by the gonds, s said that the e commanced 0000 cavlry, 8 hrge ety 30d 1000 ciephants.
we do not know, howeve, t0 whit ecentthese fgures aredependabie svrgram shak had further srenghened b onon by marryng off i 01 108 privess ofthe famows chandells rulers of mahoss.
thi priocss, who 1 fumous 21 dirgavat bocame 3 widow soon aeruards dut she nwaled her minor 100 on the throme snd el the country wilh st vigour and coursge.
she wat  good markiman both ith gwa 34 bow mnd armow.
she was fond o huming and, according 1o 4 con teaporacy, it was ht cistom that whesever o beasd that .
tger bad appeared she did ot dria waie 13 the had shot  she.
fought many wccesfl butdes againe her seghbouns, meding bez babadur of malw.
these border confcts apparetly contosed e alter maiva fad seen congqused by the moghils.
mearwil, th copidty of al khas, the mugh sovernor of allskbad, was roused by the sorkes of the fabulous wealth and the lesuty of the rasi asaf khan advisced with 10,00 cuvley from the e of bundeidand, some of the semi indepedent rules of gara tound it comenient moment 10 throw of the gond yoke, the rani was thus il wha sl foree.thoogh wounded,she ought on pilanty.
fiading that the bac vas ot nd i she was n dunger of being capured,she sabbed herlf to denth.
asaf khun then ormed the captl, chisrogarh, res modern sabalpar.
so mach phunder 1 jewels, gold slver and other higs were taken tt i iy imposible fo computs even  fracion of 1 says abul far.
0t of ol tho plonder at k sent oy two hundred clephants 10 the pr court, and eaned sl the s for bimsei.
kaniadevi, the younger sistr of the rani, was et the court when akbar had deal with the reblhon of the ushek.
nobes e foreed asaf kban 10 gisgorge s el gans, e resored the ngdom of qarhkitanga 1o chandra.
shah, he younges so of sangram shah, after takong e fots o zound ofth ko of matwa.
durin th net en years, akbar brought b majo part of rajashan under his control and sl conguered gujarat and bengal a o siep m i campaign agaiust the rajput tate wat thesicge of cttr, ths redoubi shic forrss, whih bad faced 8 mumbes of scpes o 1 bistary was considered a ky 10 centrl rafasthan,  commanded the shor it route flom agra 1o gujarrt.
but sbove.
s,  was  symbel of the rajout spint of fepsange.
abbar reaied t witbout conguerng chitor, he could o induce the other rajput rolrs to assept s szerumy.
chtor el 1568sfer s allant sicee of 5 mosh.
al the advce of his sobls, rasa e sngh had retrd o the hl, leaving h famons varrios, jorsal snd pata, m charge of he for.
mary pessants from the artousd g arc bad s taken shler wthn the fort, .
sclivey sied the defenders when the moghal ormed te ort, these peasans and many of the rafput warios were masacred he st and he st tme akbar indulged in wueh o camege.
the raput warrers did e cxrctng as mech vergeasce s posile.
n honour of e gl juimal sad p akbor ordersd iat o ston situcs of hese warmios, seated on lephant, be erested out e the chief gate of the fort of agra.
the i of clitor was followsd by the sunquet of randhambbor repued 1o be the tacat pawrful fotrs m rajushan, jodhpur e conquered carler.
as  msull of conoldatign 0f ths mlctal bupee these vctones, mostof the rajpatraes, nclud 0t thos of bkanes and jasaner, sbmited o akba.
only mevar contmucd o resst gujarat ad becn 1 4 sonry ate of tues e the deathof b shab the ity of o, 1 by deveoped erafs and 1 inportans a the cenre of the mportcxpert rade i the outude.
world had mide 8 prae woet fightng for akbar 2o bid clum o it becse humayun rad rled ovr  for some e an adduiona easen ws tat the mirs vho had faled 1n thrr reblion near dl b taken shekiss 1n gujaai, akbor vas ot prepred for ucha i province o bocome oval cenve of power.
in 157, akbur dvanced on afmacabad via aymer.
abmada nd sursndered wihout s bght akbar then wred .
atention 1o the mirzas who bld broseh, burodn wnd sust at cumbay, akbar e th sa for the it v, and.
rode on it  boal a goup of porlugvese merchants sko came and met him fo the srst tme.
the portugocse domieacd.th t scasby th e, and ad th ambiion of sab iing o empce 1 indie, akbars conquest of guars stated thess designs.
whie akbarsarmieswere besiging suat, aktar crossed the river mal ga ssivted the murzas with  sl body of 200 men whih icluded man singh and biagwan das of anber, for some e, akbs 1 ws  ganger.
but the impetioniy of his charge foured the mirzas.
thus, garat came vader muglal control however, s soea 15 axbar had tuned i back, ebllion bioke out a0 over gujarat, heamm the nes, abar marched out of agra ind uaverod sstoss rajastian 1 oine days by means of cameh, horses and carte.
on the sleventh day, he rached ahmadabad.
in this joumey, whih nosmlly ook six weaks, osly 3000 sidies were e o keep cp with akbar.
with teie s e defeated an enemy fore of 20000 1573, afler this, akbar trmed s atntion to bengal the afghans had commued 1o domaate bengal and b, ther had abo overren onsn wid kiled s rulr.
how ever, m crder not 1o e offnce to the mughals, the alhun rukr had not formally doclred el kirg, bt red the khubo in akbars same.
ioerl fghts.
amosg the afghars, wnd e decscation o mdepen dence by dhe sew rlr, daud khar, gave axbar the opportunty he was seking ak adhasced wih 3 strong ol o bout accompanyng b the afghun ing was belved .
posss  lvge amy comistm of 40000 wallmouwid cavily, an oty of about 1500, severl thousand guas 134 lephans, and a suong rotla of war bosts akbur had ot been s carcul asdthe afghars hud  beer leader, the contest etween humagun and sier shah mght el have been repeaed.
akbar s captured p, thussecaring mughal commumcations mbihar.
he then reurned to age, leavng khankhanan muraim khan, a0 cxperenced offcer, mhige of e campu.
the mol armes avaded dengal and, afer hard cam peiging, daud ws forced to sue fo paac.
ho o8 i rebelon soon aerwards, though the mughal postion in bengal snd bibar vas w veak, the meghal armies werebetes organised anded.
i 0 s6f betle i bihat 1576, dasd khan vas defcaed and cxecated o the spot.
thus ended the las afghas kingdom in nother inda.
ials0 brought 1o sa end the st phase of axbars expiasion of the i, adniuration durng the decad followng s oaguest of guiarat, aktar found e o look 31 e admmsiauve prosiems of the empee.
ths 3 system of sdmastraonlaboried by ster shah had e tato confuon st the desth of tam shah abbar, therelce had f0 sart iy one o the most inporant problems g akbar vas the s ofand evenue raion sher shah had nstiied 3 system by which the cultated srea vas messured 2d o cert schedole  was drawa up, g the duesofthe prasant cropwse on he bass o the productnty ofand.
this shedule s comverted every yar o 1 cenial hedule o press.
akoar adopied stec shats e bul ks soon found tat the g ot cencal scheduke of prices ofen led o conudersle delays, and realted 1 gt rardbipe to e pesanty.
since the pres fxed wee geerally thos prevaiog at the imperal court, and thu were igher than i the counrysie, he peasans b 10 pat with g share of the prodsce akar, thrslre, reveied t0.asystem of sl senment, the qunsegos, who were hereitay holders of jand 55 well a5 local bl convecsant wih oal condions, were orderd o reprt on the stual prodace, sate o cuaton,lcal prices, te.
but  every ara, the qaagor were dhonest snd afen concened the rial produce.
annial aess ments slso resled n geat ity for the peasanis 0. for the sate afler retrsing from gujrat 1573, akba paid porsonal atention fo the iand eveave sytem.offils gl karons were appointed al ovec sorth inda.
they were responsible for the collcion of  crore of dams rs.
250000, and sl cheoked the facs and guressupphed by the munges.
on the bass of the eforration peo ded by them reparding the actl prodace, localprces, prodocaviy, lc.. n 158, akbar imstued 4 sew syien calied the daal usder this sysem, the average poduce of ifferet crops a5 well as the sverage prcss provaling over the lastten doh yeurs were cakulaed.
oneshued of he average.
produce s the e share the sate demand vas, rowerer,saed 1n cash this was done by con vet th sae share 110 maney on the basi of a whedue of avesge prus over the past tenyeas, thu, th produce of a biga ofland ader sare was gven .
maunds.
but o the asa of average prices, the sate demand was e n rupees p bigha laer,  further mprovement was made.
not oly weee loa prcs taken o sceourt, porgoras havig the same type of prodsetiviy were grouped.
1o separte ssessment cicls.
thus, the peasant was requred 0 pay on he suss of local prodoce a3 well s joal pices.
there were 5 aumher of advaniages of s syten.
as soon 45 the aren sown by the pessant hud beea measared by means of the baboos inked with ron rings,the posant 31 well i the stae knew what e dues were, the peant vas goen remision the land ovense, il crop faled on sssaunt of drought, floods,cic.the sytem of mesurement aod the asscsment based upon it s called the satrsyem akbarsstioduced ths system 11 the area from lahore 0 allsbabad, and in malvs ind gusrat, the dabuols system was frther developmen of the abt system a number o other sytems of asessment were alo fllowed vader akbar.
the most common and.
perhaps the oldest war calied bute o ghallebakhuhi in ths syatem, the prodece s divded betvecn the pewsants and thesate in fiaed proporion the rop was daded afe it ad been thuashed, or when 1t had been ca and e 1 sacks o wi it was sxing in the fild.
ths sysem was consi dered  very i one, bet .
meeded an army of honest offcals to be present at the time of he ripenag o the respng o the cogs.
consouimox o t meghal mene the peasts were allowed 1o choose between abil and.
batl inder cern condi gons.
thus, such a choice was gien whea thecrops had becn ruined, usder bro, he pasants were gven the choie of payig co or in kind, though the sae preered .
incas o crops uch s cotin, inkgo, giseod, sparcane, , the stte demand s lovarably in cah.
hens, those were called cash crops.
a ird sysen which was widey used 1 akbars time vas sesag.
we are a bi waer i abou s sysem.
1 seem st it et a oughcaleuatios of he amosnt.
payable by e pessant onthe bass of what be had been ponng m e pust.
hence, some modern hioriass tink tat 1 was mecely 3 sytem of computng the peasancs duss, ot 2 difrent tem of st othrs ik that i meant cough spprasement boh on the bask f the aspecion o the crops and pask expenence, 0 threby saing the amouat 0 be puid by e village as 8 whole, t i caled kantr ot local chods of ssessment alio contived i some arens.
in fxing the lad revenue, contnuy of cotiaton vas faken nto scoomt.
land hlch remained usde catson slmost vy yoar vas clled poly.
when it remained tulited 1t vas calied parate o. forat jand puid st the fll 1 e when o cllivated, land whih had been llow o two to thrs years was called chachar, and i longer than that, banjr.
these were asessed st concessonal rates the revenue gemand gradsally rsng 0l he 1 o poley ate waspaid 1 the 1 or the cighth year 1 his ay, the s heiped 1 bringing virgm and ulivaed wastcand uadet clivaion.
land i classified furthr otogood, midding and tad.oneturd o the average produe wat e sate demand, but it vared sccording o o the productity of the land, the metiod of arbir vas goeply nereted i h improve ment and extennon of cltvaton.
he ksd the omil 0 act ke s faher 1 the prasats.
he i to advance money by way of oass accit o the peasscs or eeds, mpieses, animal, e, i3 tmes of eed, 478 0 rcover thew 1 caly talments.
e wasto oy nd e th peaans o plough as wuch land a3 possble 2ad to sow superiorquay crop.
the zamindars of th aea were sso sl 100 operste n the ask.
the zamedars tad  herediar righ 0 take  share of e roduce the peniant, to0, had rerebiary rght o culuvate et lad sad could ot be exted 3 ong s ey pud the nd revemse.
toe dasals s sot 4 tenyeus secemest, nt wa .
puemanea one, he e etainag the nght 1o modily .
hovever, wih some changes, akbir et remained th bass of the s34 revenve sytem of the moghal crgire 1 theend of the seventesh sentcy.
the 7 st s ssociaied with re todat mal, and s sometimes called todse malt bamdobasn todar mal vas a belisnt sevnie offcer who s servedunder sher shah.
bot e was oly one of 4 tea of briant revense offcals who came fo.
the foreron under aar ak could not bave b abe 10 expand his e and marnt b hold ove  wihout  song sy for s perpore, 1t wat ces sy for im o orgiae the nabiy s wll 3 husscmy.
ak relsd bol these bjcives by meas of the masabdor e under this system, every ofles wasssigned a rank et the lowest rask s 10, and he nighst vas 5000 fo th.
mobless tovards the end ofthe rega .
wasrased t0 7000 prines of the bood recened higrer mansbs.
the s were divded ato s ot s0d sawer, the word 2t meass personal.
tt gred the persona satusof peson, and.
b the alry due o fum.
the sswar rank mted e dumber of avlrymen wars  peson.
vat requited o mainan, a penon who v required 1 mantn a3 many sawars 4 s 2t rask s plced m the fst category of bt 1k e maaed w or more, thea in the second cucgory and o he maintaind s thas i, then n the thied category.
thu, there were three categories in every tk et to reward thoe vho marcaned o iuge guota of savars o thesiae, an addr tionl alloware at he re of rs.
7 for every suwars wag added o thesat siary.
no one couid ave o haher quot.of savars than s 2at k. alhough modication n th sysem s made fom e 0 tin, s remained the busic srcture a5 long a5 the empe eld outofhus ersoss py, e mansabdor wss expeted 1o mainten 3 orpe of phant, cumels, mules and carts thes were ecessy fo the tanort of the army.
the mughal mansabdars werepad very handiocy n fct i saares v peababy the highst m the wold tth tise, a massabder holdng the ik of 100 7t esived 8 monthly salary of re 50, one hldiog the rack of 1000 st recived ra.
4400, while ove holding ihe sk of 3000 a rceived rs.
30000 mosth.
there vas o income tax n those das.
the purchasing power of the topeo 1 thow iy s o callted to b sty s o ki it wasin 1965, evea thovah the nobies i to spend.
rovghly hall of thesr persol sy a the tpkeep of the animaly for trans port andm the adminisiaton of theie egrs hey coud esd lve f rtenttion and ey gres care was aken o easuee that he savars it by the nobies wer expriened a0d wellmousted.
for s purose, deseip tive 1ol chebra of th soder was mamtain o, 42d he hone was branded wih the cmpecal marks thi wis clled the dagh ptem, every noble had to b contin gt for peuode nspetion before persons appoisted by uhe emperor forthe.
purpore the horss were carfuly spected.
and only 004 qualty o o arabic and.
jraal breet sere emploged for every ten cavarymen, e mansabar i to e twenty ories t was o, besase horss had 10 be resied hleon march, and replcements were necs sary i tmes of war.
a savar wih oaly 0 borse s conmdard to be only bl 4 sowr the moghal cavalry fore remained an eflccat one aslong as the 102 rle was sdhered to provison.
was made hat the conagonts of the nobles thould be mved ones, tat .
drawn rom all e groups  moghal.
pathus, hindustan and rajput thes, albar e 1o etk the foces of trbalam and prockl.
the mogial and rajps notles were alowed 10 ave contngents sxcusively of mughals or rajputs, bu m coure of e, muxed ontn et becane th genenl rule agart from cavalymen, bownen, ket s andulel, sappes and e were sho rived 1n e conmgens the sarie vared the average salary of  savar was ra 2 per mosh dmss sad terans fceved more animfustiynanrecovved sbout re 3 per month.
the swary due 1o e sidiers was added o th personsl slary ofthe mansabdor, who vas g by wsmgaing o him a g, somelines, the maruhders were pud in cash akbar did o ke tie i system bt could ot o away wit 1, 51 1 was 100 deepy entresched as  g did ok gonferany hredzary s 04 e holder, o diturd any o the cxsing rights m the ares, it only meant ha the land revense due 10 1 st vas o be pad to e indar.
akbarkept  large body of avelrymen ashis odyguards.
he kept 8 big sable of horses.
he alo.mauntined a body of genle man troopers.
these were pectons of noble incage who did no have the means of ise ostinge or were persons who.
had impres sed the emperoe they werealowsi 0 koep.
ight to tn horses,and recenved 2 bgh salary af sbout rs 00  month they were ansver able only o the emperor, and had separate muster master.
these pople cold be compar.
e tothe kaights of medeval europe.
akou et very fond.of horsesand cepnants he o mantained a suong park of iy, akbar was specally imoiesed i gons.
ho devisd.
detschable gons which could be camed on an clephant or  cunel, thete were thio heavy sege guns for breachung torts som of thatc wte 10 heavy tat 100 o 200 oxen and several clphanis were necled o pull them.
a srong purk of wilery accompasiedthe empeor whesever he moved ot of he oaptal.
we do not know whether akbar over had plans of buding a savy.
the lack of u irong navy remained .
key weakes of the moghal cmpre.
if akbar had the ume, he g have pud ateaton to .
he did sulld et foull of war bots wheh he vied in his castemn cumpuigns.
some of the boats were over 30 metres toag and diplaced over 350 o orgasision of government hiardly any chasges were made by akba 10 the organltion o local governmant, the porgana and the sarkar sontnuod as before t chier offcers of the sarkar were he audar and the amalpazor, e tormer beng in charge of law and order, and the e respon s forthesssssmcnt and collesion of the s tovenue.
the terrtones of the cope s were dwided nto g, kialsa and e, tncome from kiulisa vilages wen dicly 0 the royal excheguer.
the inam ands were those wheh were aloted o learnod and ehpous men.
jagus wee lloted o nobesand members o the ol umily mcladmg the queens, the amelgize was reqiced to sxerse  genest supervinoo over ail types of hakings 10 tat e lnpenl rles s egulavons for the asscssmen and olltion of fand revenie vers followed uniforly oy autoaomoes tams were ot e to contmee teir taditioml and reverve e a the terctoties even there, akbar encoursged them 1o follow the el st akbar pard great attnton t the organa wion of the ental and provincal governments, hissystem of cental government was based o the stusture of govemment wheh bad evelved under the delki sukanat, but the tunctions of the vanows depatmets vere catfully seorgamied, and meticulous rles d replations were lid dow for the conduet of alfurs thus, he gve 3 ew shape 1o the sy and bicathed sow e nio it the ceatial asun aad trmurd iradiion s of baving an all poverfl wacy under whom various heads o departments function e he wa the prncpal link between the uler and the sdmisirain.
ta course of time, o sepuraedeparizmen, the miliary epastmens.
ad come ot bizg.
the it ciry had alvays been sepurte.ths, in pracic,the concept of s llpowertl wazu had been given up.
hovever, s his capacy s waki, daiam kban hudexcrsed.
the power of aa a.poseriul asi.
akbar reorganied the cenral machiery of admmstruion on th bais o te dvinan of power bewsen ariows depactents, and of ghecks and alances whie tho post of waki wis sor sholihed,  v 10 stripped of il powee sad became largely docorative.
the post wis givea o mpor tant o fom e to i, bt they paved t pat i admumstration.
the head ofthe revene department conised 0 be the wezr.
he was not geneally  persoa who beld o bigh postion n the noblity.
masy nobles deld massabs which were igher than .
thus,be was 50 longer the princpal advaer to he rale, but 12 exert i revense afis.
to emphasie thipom, akbargeneall e the e of divn or drwanala i preer oee 10 the word xasr.
sometimes, sverl persons weresked 1o schare the duies of ovan il the dan was resposnivle for il income and expenditre, and held control overkbalia, g and oam lands, the head of the miltary depariment was el the i ok, t was the o bokhah and not the doan who was copdered th nead o the nobikey.
theeloe, oaly the leading erandess wee appoined 0 ths post.
resommendtionsfo appornimen to mansabs or for promotions, etc, were made o the coperor through the o babhek, o the emperor had accepted 4 recommendation, wit 40t 10 the drvan for coofirration and toe sssaing  jage o the appoiaie.
the same procedure was followed in case of promotions.
the mu bokhsh was slso th head of the nteligesce aad.informaon agencies of the empre.intligence ofices bars and e reorters vogenans wese posd to all jarts of the empie.
their reports were presentd 0 he emperor at the court throogh e ok i il han b secn ot the diven i the iy bokish were simos on  pa with, 40 ebported and checked, cach odber.
the third.
mportant ocer was the mir scman, ho was a charse of the fmperial eetar.
bousehold, including the supply of all the provaions and arices for the e of the nmaes of he harem o the female apartments.
many of these artces vere manufactured under supecviion 1 royal worlshops called karkbonas.
only nobles who enjoyedthe complete conbence of the emperor vere sppaated o o ofice.
the maatenance of etguete at the cour,the contral o the royal bodygaard, eic.
were al under the oversl supervtos of s ofcer, the fourth importantdepartment was the jodionl department beaded by the el aul.
ths pos was sometimes combined wlhthat o thechuetsadr who was response bl for an chantable and religious sadow.
menis.
thus i was  post which carried consderabie power and patrosage.
it fell inlo bad odour due o the corrupion and venaiy of akbars chief gz, abdun nabi afes iastuing  carefol srutiy of the rans hed by varios persons, akbar separt.
e the nam i from the jgic and khala lands.
a4 dwided the cmpiro rst0 sixcreis for purpors of goast of inam lands and ther sdmivstraton.
two featores of the iam gruats e noteworthy.
first, akbar made 3 deliberte part of s poicy o grant inam ands 10 all pesons, irerpctive of their el fih and beets.
sanads of grant to vanous hinda maks made by akbar are sll presrved.
second, akbar made i 4 rule that balf o the fnam land should consst of cullivable wsteand.
thus, the insesholders e eaconraged 10 exend caluvation i oder o make hiuself scassaible to the peopie s wel as t0 the munistrs, akbar care.
tl divided his time.
the day stased with the cmpeors appearasceat the jharoka of the palace.
lucge sumbers of people amenbled daily o v .
glimpee of the rule, and fo presat pecions 0 n if necemary, these consoudatin 0r t mooal burme petions were attnded 1o immediately, ot fn theopen darbar daniom which followed, and s g maday.
the emperor then tced to his spartments fo meals and res.
scparate i was alloted o he muniers.
for confdential consultatons, the miniters e geeralycalled 0 8 chumber which was mated mear awbars bathing sparment ghal khone.
o course of time, g provate conmltation chamber came o b caled ghial ey akar divided the cmpur i twele sobas n 158d these were bengal, biar, allahabed, avadh, agra, delh, lahors, malin, kabal, ajmer, maws a0d gujarat.
a goversor swbadir, a dwan, 3 bekho, o s, o gui, 8 vegusnans vere sppoinid 1o cach of he provisces.
thus, orderly government based o the prnigle o checks and.
balaaces was exieade to the provnces.
reatoss with he rajputs akbar rltons wi the ruputs have to b seen agaist he wider sackground of maghal policy tovards the powertul ras and zamindars of th country.
when humayun came back to tndia, beembarkedupoa  elbersie poliy of teyng 1o win over these clements abol fasl says that in ordec lo socthe the minds of the zamindars, he entered it st ol reatons ith her.
thus when jumal kban mevati whowas one of th great amundarsof idia, submitied to humayus, he married one of his beasiful dasghters il snd marned the youager s to bairam khan, in courie of e, akbar expanded sad slsborated thi polcy.
bhara m, the sle of amber, had come.
o albars court 3t agra immedately afer bis scceion.
he had made  favourable 1 cephant, the rputs under biara mal ad ood fim.
1n 1562, when akbr wis going 0 ajoce, b eant that bhara mal was ek bacased by the ocal mughal govrnor.
bham ml p et o o al 128 semented th liance by marryng o you s danghir, harka bt 10 aoy mariages betwien mo rlers and the daughters of hindu poicnates were not v wal.
many caie of wch slices ty various pars of e country g the fourceah and eenth ccntunes have boe ted s, maldeo, the povertl er of jodhpur, had marned k daughier, b kaaia, 10 sutan mabmad of gujurst and another, lal b to the ser ruer, probably tt shah sur.
most of thess mamages had not o to o cuablshment of amy sabls perionl elatons becwees theconcened wil were genealy ot 10 nd never came back s mamage.
akb folowed.a dierent poiy, hemave comicte regioss frsdom 1o s hinda wives, ad g 21 honosred pace to ther pareny wnd reaion n the lobily, bhara mal was made  bigh grandee.
h son, bhagean d, 1o 1o the sask o 5000 and ks grandson, maa siagh,to he ke of 000, th rask was sccorded by arba 1o only one other nobi, aziz kban kuks, b totrbrother, aktar emphassed his spcal rlsonsbip wib the kachomwata rues other ways 4 wel.
theinfun price, danyal, as st to amber to be brought up.
by bara mals wivs.in 1572, when akbar dashed to guisrt, bhara mal was placed 1 charge of agra where sl the oyl indies were reudin, a sigul hosour gnen oaly 19 nobles who were cither eatons o sia condaats of the empeor.
ki impression on the young king, for when people but akbar did ot upon matrimdnial et r  .
e 12 rltions wers saterd nto with the fadss of rerthumbbor, and et thy 1emmed high in akbars four.
rao suren hads was placed ncharge of garhkatangs, and roe 0 e ank of 2100, smirly, 20 matrimonal relations wece entred nio with the rulos of siroh and basswars who submited f2 albar et on aidurs rajput poley wes combuned with  poliey of broud reipous toleration tn 1564, e abolshed the fiyah which was smetmes i by the s o humyate nonmuslens.
he had carler sbolshed the pigrax, s0d he practce of forcbie coverson ofprisoses o followng the conquesc of chtor, most of the endng ruput rulers hadaceeped akbars syzeraty and pud prsonel homage o n the rlers of jualmer and bikaser ed oo emered o mtrmonial relaons wik abbar, the only sate which bad st sty e o g gl sy altough chitor and e pinares accund 1 had coms under moghal domina.
on, udspur and the huly aees whih formed the larer e of mowa had remarned vader e comrol of the ress in 157, ran pratap succseded rans udes singh to the ao of cmbasses wees by akbar o rana pratap 1o persade him 1o ccept muglhstswacray ad to do personl homage thete embasucs, inciuding e one led by n singh, were conrteousy recsved by the rana the sory hat he nslid man sngh 5 9008 hisore fao.
and s uncharactr s o the rat who dlvays behwred 10  ghaalrous and courzous e evn towards n opponcrts.
man sughs cmbaney wax tollowed by one.
snder bhagsan dos, and smotherunder ras todar ml at one time, i seems tha the rans was prepared for 8 compromse m put on the impeia robe lent by akbur, und sent s son.
avwe singh, o the cosrt wah bhagnua das o do bomsge to akbar and scoept i seevee but no tl agreoment could bo resched as the provd rama wes not prepared o mocept akbars cemand for tenderioa.personal hoe age.
abo, 1 seems hat the moghals wanied o keep hoid of chitor which wes not  sbie o the ram early i 1576, akbar moved 1o ayner, and deputed raja man siogh wih o force of 5000 o lead  campaign sgaiest the rama antpaion of thi mave, the rasa had devastated the esire termory p 10 chitor o that the mughil torces might ot 10 food or fodder he had ao forufed il the passs i the bils a furious bale betwoen the 0 udes was waged at haldighat, a rarrow ot leadng, o kumbhalgars, whieh was then the ranws cupial  apat from sclsied raput fores, the ranas van was lod by halin kian ser with hus alghan contingeat, thus the butte of haldsghats was not  srugele beowee the hindus wnd the musliss, or betwsen the tdians and the forcgrers a smal fore of the bis whom the rana had helinded was also present.
the ramas torees e put a2 3000,  the onsaughi by the rajputs aad the afghans tuew the moghal force 1nto diray, bt the rumours that akiar had armed i person salhed them, wih fros mughal renforcemess, the tide of butde began o tan sgunst the rajpus.
sociag the, the rana excapod.
the mughal foross e t00 ured 10 purs hum but, sfer sometime.
dhey alvanced theough the pass and occupied gogunds, 3 strong pont wheh had been evacuatd by the rara caler.
this was the st e the r engaged 0 a piched bathe wi the voghats.
flenceforth he rsorid 1o methods of gueulls watfre the defet st haldighati id not weskeo rasa praaps resove 1o fight on for inde.
pendence.
howeve, the cavse for which he good had alrady becn lost most of the rajpu sates had acsepied mughal suzeainty by bis polcy o indocting the rajpat rajs 10 mughal sevie sad tresting them on 8 b1f with the mughal prundecs, acoordiog broad relgious toeration 1o his subjects, and his courtoous behaviour 10 his former opponents, akbar soseeded in cementeg s allnce with the rajput rulers therefore, rana.
pratapsreu o bow before the mughals h lite offc on mostof the other rajput stites which realled th .
the calsting usion,  v smposibe forsmall staes 1o sand out tor long in avour of complee independence.
morcover, by alowing 3 lacge messore of ooy 1o the rajput rjas, arbar asabish 4 an empre which those rojpet s di not onside harmfl o thr best terests, rama prataps delance of the mighty mghal empise, almost alone and unaided by the othe raiput ttes, constitates  glonous mgx of rajput valour and the spuic of crifce for cherished priociples  rans pratnp slso experimenied siccenolly with the methods of gueril warfare which were i to be caborated furtker by malik ambar, the deccani genral, and by shiva t notnecessary 1o disuss in detal the srvggle between akbar and rana pranp for some time, akbar exeredreleatens presure o the rasa,the mughls overran he stses of dungarper, banswars, scobi, i, whih were dependent llies of mowar hud sepporied rana pratsp.
akbar con luded teparate tratis wik thse  stes, hus furher wolatiog mevar.
the rana wat huned fom forest 0 fores 4 from valey 0 valey.both kumbhalgach and ucipur were oupied by the moghes.
the raa voder.
15 went great bardibips, but thanks 0 the support of the bl chies, be could contisse nt defsace.
the mughal presure relussd afier 1579 due o serious revol .
bikar and bengal, 1 proest aginst some reforms el o by akbar.
akbars halebrother, mira hakin, mado sa incunion ato the posisb i order to i introubled waers.
thus, akbar had 1o face a most srious inieral s, in 1585, akbar moved 1o labore 1o vatch he sitation i the morthvest which had become gangerous.
e remained there for the next 12 years.
no mughal expedion was st apainst rana praap after 155, tuking advantage of the uaton, rans pratap resovered many of s tertors, i cluding kunbbalgarh wod the vt hear chitor.
but e sould not resover chitor it during this perod, he bulk  oew capial, chavand, sear modern desgarper.
he dicd 10 1597 ot he youn age of 31, de o an intenal injury incured by him while tryng to draw  il bow.
apart from mewar, akber bad to fice oppontion in marvac 25 well followiag the desth of maldeo 1562, there was  dispute for succesicn between kt soms the yousger o0 of maldeo, chasdrasen, who was th son of the favounie queea of maldeo, suceeeded 10 the gaddl.
due i the prews of the mughas, he had to give pars of n sountry i gt 0 s elder brothers.
bt chandrassa did not ke thi arangement ssd e some e, fose in ebelon.
akbac sow took marmar sader irec mughal sdminisn.
oa, one rouen beag isdesive lo loguard the mughal sapply route to gujarat wheh e hrough jodbpur.
at its conques, abar appoisied rai singh bikaner 0 look after jodhpur.
chandrsen rosied valisnly and waged 4 guerila warfare b atir soma time he had 1o sk refge in mewar, 13 even thece he v e from plceto plce by he mgt e o 1587 a soapl ofyear tr, akt conetedjodigur wpon ul smgh, he e st of chamdrien o swenghen s poscon, uds  st maried s dusghi, ot goun o1 jodna i ay e cam 0 5 cned, o akonrs st sonsubn u the dol form of arbes g e bidgroamts pay went o ha o b, and 3 mumbe of hindu s e flowes.
th sappenad when abarvas reing s lo akt a0 ad clow peconal rltns it e rues of ikt nd bonds who seved i various cmpugns i dncon t 1593, wher the somm o of r s o7 bianer g due o o from hs ol ak went persosly ot s house o comelo i, 4nd duaded o daugior from putorming a1 1 s chidien were youne.
the rajpt poley of abter proved ene it the mophal it 2 wel .
0 he raipus.
the slanc scured 1o i mghat g e e f the.
brave.
watiors t, o et ty of s ropots e an mportant fctor i h comei om and snpanvn of e empoe the aiaree conred pece in rausan, and cabld the rt 1o srvetn facung.
pan of the pt wihout worming abowt the afty of e homanscs.
by bony rald mie e mperl v, imporiaatpostions 1. the e wete open o e rt e t bragves das o amber s spporicd.
i sovemor of likore.
whia s s, n s, s e i charae of kebul lter, sagtuu e e svenor of boay bl ot reiut s wre s ot g o o a ajmet and gur, a vt s alk fandes of e empire, ey vere gonied somal b e n addton o therr herditary kingdoms, hus unenting ther resouces.
akbar raput policy was contmued by b iutangir and shah i, tahaagi, whose mother vas  rajpt princes, ad b ll marid u kachhawaha princes s well  jodhpur prsces.
princeses of the hovses of jasalmer and dikane e aiso mamed to rim jahangur gave he hghest honost 10 the s of al hee houses the man achuevement of jahaugi, how ever, was the setlement of e ovisiandisg dupite win mowar rana pratap bad been siceded by b fon, amar sagh.
akbar rad sont 3 senes of expediions agalns avar smen i order o force him 10 accept his condtons jubang nl ws sen against e, but could chieve il afler s scseuon n 1605, jabane 100k up the mattr crerseialy thiee sicesive campagas et tanchd, but they could not break the raraswit.
tn 1613, jahasgir il resched amer fo duet the campaign.
prince kharam ater shah jabas v depoted with arge army o mvade the mostainous parts o mewar the heavy pressure of the mughal army,the depapulaton of the courtry, and sulbion of agreultse, a st produced thels e many sartars defeied 1o mughas, e olbers pressed for peace.
the rasas son, karan singh, who was deputed 1o procesd 0 jahangees court was graciouty received.
gyt 5ot up.from the dvore.
embraced.
him in sarbar und loaded nim i gifs.
to e he ranss proige, jahanan 64 not st vpon the ranas puing personal homage fo i, and enterng the roval servce prince karsa was accorded.
the rank of s000, which had been earler accorded 1o he rurs of jodvpur, bicaner and amber.
he was 1o erve the moghal emperor with s contingent comsouation o7 15 wookal bt 155 of 1500 mvars.
al th tertories of mevar, inciding chitor, were restored.
bt in view of the sategc impatance of chiter, it vas ipalated that s forfations would 1ot b repared.
thus, jshanpe complted the sk begu by akbar, and futhe strcgthesed th llance iththe rayputs ebllionsand fartbe exansion of the mughal eapiee the sew system of admirisration iro duce by akbar,as described above, mpicd figkenng of the admimstrtive machiney, grater contel over the nobles 10d mcre reprd o the teests ofthe common peope it v, ereloe, mot 1o the kg of may nobies.
sentmens of regonal ndependence wte sl trong, pariculary in ares ich a3 gufarat, beng and biar, al of which tad tong rxdiion of forming.
sepuate knudons.
in rajathan, rana pratps strggle for fre.
dom wasconinung.apce.
i hs seuacion, akbar vad 1o dea with .
sers of rebellon guiarat remaned  saie of nves or v year du o s o fo frecdom b 8 represen.
atve of the old lng dynasy.
the most srios ebelion derng the period was in benat and birar whichextnded to asopor, the mai cause of the rebelion vas te stnct esfocement o he dagh sywem or brandingof thehores of te jagrdars, and st acocet ing of telrincome.
the ducortent, vas band by some reigous divies who were unhapry st akbars el views, ad at his poley of reming the large tevensefee s of land wheh had been obained by them, somctines lgaly.
akbaes.
balf.
brother, mirzs harim, the euler of kabul, s abeted he reeloe and held oot the hoge of imvading the puriab 3 the sitble e fa order toelp.
a lrge bamber of afghans i the easern pars weresllen s the s of the afhan power und were ever ready 0 jon 0 ebelion, thereblion ket the empice dutcctd or simost two.years 158031, 304 abar was faced with vry s and delete st tion.
due to the msancling of the sivaton by local offciahs, bengal and it the whole of biar pusad o the handsofthe rehels sho proclamed miez hakin 53 et roer.
they ven g  relipous.
divine 0 i o jatwa, callng o e o t take the ld e ak ak gid ot jose s serve.
ho des patched .
force undr toda mal g bhar 4 bengal, and anoter urdee raja man singh 1o, chck e cxpected attack by mz hukm todar mal proseeded with great vigour and act, and broughth station th et underconrol beore mirza hakine avanon.
teok pace.
mirza hakim advascod on labore vih 15000 horses, but cond ot ke the cuy doe 0 hesoutdece by raja man sngh and biagea das.
s hopes hat larpe numbers of nobes i the paniab would rebel aadjoin um were ako belied.
meaa while, aibar marched on labore with o wellgscplned torce of sl000 bores.
mieza hakim had 1o opion b t0 bt  baty etrst.
akt crowned n s by marchingto kabud 1550, the frt tune 4 i ruer had eterd te rstore town, sce mirzs hakom refsed to et akbars sueraey,or 1o some 0 pay pesoral allegiae o him, and.
e tndan sablsand slders were besomag esrve, akoar handed over kabul 1 bis e, tnda.
the handing over ofthe kingdom o  vorsa was symbole of akbar broad mdednes od el akbacs wiuaph over his oppoocals was ot ony a prsonsl seces, but sk showed.
156 it the sew system vas beginning 1o ke foots.
akbac wis now fee 1o thiak of the fother expansion of is capire.
he vas dawn to the decean in whih he had long seen ntersed.
bot belore he coud do anythog, the sitoon in the norhovest camed atenton agun.
abulah khan usbek, the herediry enemy of the mughals, had been gradunly guterng srength 1n cenral as.
to 1556, he overran badakahan which had e uid by he tourids.
kabul sppesred 0 be next on he .
both mia hakim and the tiorid princes ovsed from badakbuban 0w appened 10 abar for help.
bt before be could do amyhing, mieza habim died due to excenive drinking.
keaving kabul n  sate of dturbunce.
akbas now ordered man sigh t0 march o kabal, an himelf moved o attack o the v todus.
t orderto bock l roads o the usheks, be st cxpediions sgainat kasbie 1589, and against baluchsian the whole of kashai, inluding ladakh aad balisan called tibet khurd and tibe buzurg, came under mughal domination, 5 davghicr of the chie of bastan being marcied o the young salim.expediions were sl sen 0 lear the kiybar pas which had bee blocked by relulion tribemen.
tn s ctpediion against e, ran bbal, the favounte of akber, lost his life.
but the afghan besmen weregradeal forced fo submt.
the consolidaton of the sorthwes 0d fxing o wenifc fronier of the smpue wie w0 ofthe majr conribuions of akbr, his conquest of sidh 1550 o opeaed the puniab for rade down the rvr indus.
akbar sayed at lahor ul 1398 whea the death of abdullah usbek fisaly removed the theat trom theside of the usbeks, afe eting the aftus of e sorthwest, ak turned bssietion towards he sty of castorn and westera inda aod the deocan.
orina, which was ot th time under the domi aation of afghan chics, wasconguered by rafa man singh who was the moghal governor of beogal man singh also congucred cooch bikar and pars of east bonga, schudmg daca.
mirza asiz kok, the fostebrother of akbar, conquered.
kathawar in the et kbaskhanaa muries khan vas deputed to the decssn slosg wih prine murad the devclopments 13 the deccan would e deslt with 1  separae chapter.
subceit to my here that by the turn of the century, mughal contol had been esiended up to abmadagi, binging the mughals nto dicect contace itk the marathas fr the fist .
thus.
the poltal inegraton of north india had becn achieved by the furn of the century, and the mughals had warted the penetration of the deccan.
but what was even more mportani, the cultsral and.
emotiomal ntegation of the people within this vast e deveaped space towards inegraton we have seen how, during the seenth century, a sumber of rulers in iffrent parts ofthecousiry had red 1o promote greaer understanding setween the hindus a0 the muslims by haviag seclar sod religons lers tore in saoukrit trassnted nto perian, by iving patronage o local iangusges sad lera fure, by adopting  more iibeal policy of religious toleaton and, in some cases 5 giveg.
mportan job,icluding servie at the court nd 1a the army.
0 the hiss.
we have aho et how s remarksbl senes of popular saints, fuch as chaitanys, kabi 10d naoak, in dil ent parts of the country crphasined the camotial ity of liam a0 hindvien, sad laid sires on  relion bused on love aad devotion racher than one based oa works or 3 conioliation of the mughal botre literal intrprtaton of revesled books.
they thuscrated he atmosphere in which lberal senimens nd views could grow and religous hartownes was focked down vpon this was the stmospbere 1o which akbar was born and rearsd.
one ofthe st actions which akbar took, aftr e had taker power in s own haads, was to sbolsh he polltax or fzyah which the s mustms wee requited o pay n a mustion sate.
athough 1t wes 5ot 3 heavy tax, it was disiked becavse it made 8 ditiction between subjet and subjct.
at the same.
time, akbar abolished the pilrim.tax on bath g at ol placs soc s prayag, basaas, e, he alio sholshed the practies of forsbly converiag prisoners of war o isam.
this aid the esetialfoundation of sa empire besed onequalrights to sl ctzen,irvespet e oftei efigious belets.
the ibera pisipls of the empie were strengthescd by bringing sble hindus into the by, while most o these were rajpot s, many of whom coterd o matrimonial rltlons with axbar, asd with whom he had ablished personal relationshp, massabs wergiven o ohers 8l on the bass of ther competece.
amoog the later, the blest and the motwellknown were todar mal, expert n evease.
s, who rose o the post of diven, nd birbal, who was  favourite of the empecor.
aharsatitode towands is hinda subects s coslyinked with his views of bow  sove fen thould behave towards.
b mbiects.
thcse views which have been carefly xplin o by akbars iographer, abul fad, were so amalgan of timurd, perian and jodian idess of soversigaty.
aeeording to abul faz, the ffceof s rue rule wis .
vry responsible one which depended on divine.
amination parrbcad, heoce, no one could sand el botwen god and a true ruler.
a true rukr s dtnguihed by 3 pternal fove towarde his subjcts without ditstion of s of creed, a lrge bese s that the wishe of ret and smallar aieaded to, praer aad devotion a0d 3 iy ncreasing irest in god who s gonsidered 3 the real uler.
1t was sbo the duty of the ralr o maisiain cquiibeium in sosiey by not allowing peopl of one raak of profesion t itefer n te dutis nd obigs tions f azother.
allhes togthe constitted what has been caled the polcy of sl or peace toal from the begining, akbar was deeply atersted n rebgion and philosophy.
at the ovtat, abarwas an oribodox mulim.
he paid rest deference to the leading gezi of the state, abdua nabi ko, who bed the.
post of sadrusadhe w54, on coe occasion, oven carried bis dlippes for hin.
bt by the ime.
akbar reachedadalthood, myscom which were abal fazl 184 along wih thir ther scholar bad boen peciected by the for baving sympatiy witn mabdawi idems.
anether vas  rabmana, mahesh d, who wasgiven th i of raj birbl, a0d was  consant compamion of akbar.
ta 1575, akber buit hal calld toedat i kbans ot the hal of prager a s new capal, fatehpur sikei to this he calld selecied bealopan, mysts and those of s courtirs i nabies who e known or ther scholar.
ihp and melctal atanments akber uned telgous and spuival topks with them, he freuendy s, my 3ol obch, ok wite ok, 1 10 wcrtae o o find st nd s the prmrples of peaine regon.
the proceedgs, at fs.
werecon e 0 the mustons they wereharly rderly.
the mllhs wesngled, shoved, ved sbused exch ater even 1 he resne ofthe emperor the bckaviour of the ks, theitpde and conce ther earning dsgusied adbar, and farter ahenated e from the il al sage, akbar opened the thadat khana 1o people of ol rligionschrsians, torousriars, hindes,jais, evn atbests.
this rcadesed the discussions, and ven s on ich ol mo e sgrced, suh s whether e quan was e i eveled book and muhwmmad s prophet esorrection, rature of god, began o be dibated tais horibed he hesogran,andal kinds f rumours began o ceate sbout akbars dste 1 fonake am.
av s modern write ss, th patience and open mindodocss of akbar s cansirved 4 varity of ways by persons ofdiffrent .
tnstead of bringiag  e, e ioadat khana brought powing dcedi al his time, cnqry whs conducted o he ol of the chet s, abdun nabs, who.
was found 1o be extemcy corruptaod tyran.
i s desings m the disrbtion of cha.
bl s nadademash.
he had amasiod el oter corupt nd mean vays s wll.
he was bigot and had nfcied the puniah ment of death on he shis, and o a brabrana.
s mihura for therr bef.
al e, abdun nabivas shesred of i over, and s wero sppornied n evey provice for dtribuing.
chariable landssoon he was damised aad dered to proce to moce for .
al about he same e, i 157380, 3 rehllon broke.
outm he st a number of farnas were gven by the gen, deshrng.
akbar o be s heete.
akbar uppresed therebelon and gav drastc punshmcet t e iz to furber srngihen s postion indeskg withthe s, akbar s sed 3 decla ion o mahiar whh aerted that i there wer confietung viewsamors thoe  who et considered  o nterpret the quron, akbar, by virie ofbeing a most jost and i king, and e rank berng bgher in the yes ofgod than of the miahds, was eniied o choose any ose of the aeepreations.
which would be of hencht 0 the sation and i e nteres of good order futher, f akoar el u sew order in conformay wih the ouron and clciated 0 beneht th naton, sl shouid bebound by .
the declaraton which vas sgned by the tending vismas hasbeen wronyly called  dc recof inalibiy, akber clumed the ight o choore nly when there was 3 diflernce of opinion smong those qualifed o interpret the quan, at 3 time when there were bloody conficts between the shiss, the suntis and the mabdawis in differcat pacts.
of the couny, akbar wisicd the wides religious toleration.
thereis file douls tha the matzer ad  jary eflec 1 stablising the relgioos sitaa on n the empie, but avbar was les susesstol i s efloet to find n mectng place betwee the votares of ilfernt relgions n the countey, the debaes in the toadat khars had noted 103 beter underntanding between difteent religons, but to grater biernes, s the represntaivs of each elgon denounced the other and.tried 0 prove that thei religion vas superir to others.
henc, i 1982, akbar disontiaaed the consouoation of tr mchal bmfrs debates 18 the toadat khsna, but he id not v v e quest for truth.
evea il bt  e, badayan, says  night 04 day people dia othag ot inquireand.vstgate akoar ovied purushottam and devi to expound e doctines of hinduiu, 154 mahati rana to explan the doetues of zorousiarism.
he et some portuguese priests and n order to ndestand the chrstan docirnes beter, he et n embasey to goa, requestingthem 0 lend two lenrnd misionaries o niscour the portugues ent aquanva and monserate who remained st akbars court for almost fhres years and have et a valuabe accout o 1. bt thes hope of convertng akbar fo chvis ity neve fad any basis.
aktar came i touch wih e s lso and, ot his nstcee, theleadiag jom st of kathuowar, it vg suri spet coupl of years at akbarscourt contacts with leders of various elpens, reading of thae leened works, mectings wilh the s s and g gradealy conviced akbar that whilethere were difrencesof st and ceed, all ligions had 3 arber of good poins wheh were obscurd i the heat of controverss he l hat e good ports of satlos religons were emphasied,an tmor phere of harmony and amiy would preval wnch vonld e for the g00d f thecouniry.
furthe,he l that behundal he malupley of s ad forms, here was but one.
god.
as bussyuni observed, a5 a seultof il the nfluencs whih were bought o bear on s mjety, here grew gradualy usthe outine of  stone, the convcton in n hert that ere were some.
sensible men 1 al eigons.
iriome rue knowledge wes s everywhere 10 found, why should rat b confined to sssrts ot s 3 ressl of s, akt gradully turned ey from tsam and ku 3 new rligon whioh was compounded 19 of many exisung reigonshinduis, cirs ianty, zorostrinim,cc.howeve, modern historans e ot inclied to scsep hsview, and thok tho badayuni s exsgperated.
there s il evidence o prove tha akbar intended ot actually romuigaed s new region.
the word sed by abel fiz and badayuni fo the socalled new puh was el sk whieh iecaly means divie mosctbeism.
the word dinor fith way s appledfo i i 0 jearsaer.
the roubed 1o wes resly an onder of the sufsc type.
those who were wilng o and those whom the cmperor appioved were aowed o become.
members.
sunday was fxed a3 th dayfor mention.
the movie placed b head 1 the feet of the emperor who cused hm .
nd gare b the torma, el hast e suf language, wk he was o repea nd.
concentate upon.
ths comaned albers favounic motts alabo at or god s tret.
the itates were 1 abean from mest 35 far a5 posstie, t least i the mowh of thir birt, g 3 sompteous fust and e sl on e by, thre were r0 saceed books r scepares, 20 prisly gase 0o place of worthp o ritms and ceremons, except e intiaton.
badeyum fays that the.
memters had foue grades of devoion, .
saznfe oneur and regon.
these, apan, vare ke the rades a sof pased.
givng v rlgion, apparsaty meant grvng up ttachment fo the marrow cooceps and obserances which, wat m keping with s8 s, akbar 6d rod.
s torce nor was money vid for makng dissples 0 fct, maay lsding sobls, nclod g a1 the aret hoads obles cxcept bk, desined o jour.
the namber of persons who ctally joved thecrderwas s, many of them comisting of personl favaurics of aklar.
thus the order wasnot expected 0 piy animportant politcalole.tn any cas, by the time the orde was intiated, akbar had comsolidted bl el posion, and.
sch an arcil prop was hardly necessary.
wha, s, were akbars motver historans rave difirent views is the mater.
badayeni ascibed 0 atbars had beng turned by mary unworthy aterersand panegyrists who suggesed t b that be wan e .
kamil o the pefect man o he age.
1t was t thei instane that abtar initsed theceremony of pabes or oming the for beforethe sovereigs, 8 cere mony which waspreviously reeved for god.
peron and abul faal says that it was patu o peepe 0 tura o their e for spirical idunc and that akbar was wel qualied 0 jadthe people tospiritual bl and o ctablid barmony smoag waring creeds.
whatever nay have beca ayboys motives, e tubid 1k itally died with i, the.
practice of gving 4 st o e ites war continued ff ome time by jabangi s, bt oo it wes disconted.
however, the babit of lookiag vpon the kisg a8 somcone hav minculosspowens, 10, hat people could be 4 cared by e kings toweh, or by i reading pom  pot of mter, coninsed, snd ven s e e such a8 aursagach coul not shake.
ot et abbac 11t 10 cmphasie the concept of b o peae and harmony amosg religions i otbr waysas well.
e setup 4 g trane ton depurnent for trnsiting works i sunsks, anbic, oreek e, o perian.
thus the snghon b, the athorsaveda a8 the bl were taken wp firs for trassaton.
these wer folowed by the molabhraia, the gl sad the ramayana many others,iclud g the pasia onira sad works of geograghy, were aho traraated.
the quran  was a0 ansated, perhaga for the st tme.
atbar sao troduced 3 mumberof socal and docatonslrlorms.he sopoed sal, the buring of  widow, usless she herself, o bee v fee will,persitdlydesired k. widows of teade age who had ot shared he bed with hir husbands were not 1o be bura t all.
widow remarriage vas also legalsed.
akbar wasagaost aayose having more than oue wile e the it wie was barten.
the age of marriage was raised 10 14 for g and 16 for boys.
the mle of wines and spits was retncted.
not sl theses teps were, boweve, succemful as we koo, the suess of sockl legiation depends largly on the willg cooperstion of the people.
akbar was living in n sge of supersiton and it seems that o socal reforms had only imted sococss.
akbar s revised the educational ylabes, iaying more emphasis on moral educaton.
and mathemats,and o0 scula subicts uch 38 agritur, geomety, aswonomy, les of soverment, og, history, e, ho aso gave paironage o artit, pocts,peiners and mos cians so much o, i hus courtbooame famous for the galaxy o fumous poople there or the ravratne.
thus, undec akbar, the siate became exsestally secua, tberal andealightened in socal maters, 0d  promotr of outeral integration exercises discuss the problens faced by akbar doring the caly yeas of his mign.
what ies dd e take to avereome those probles 1 consolmation o t mughal martzs describo the land revenus adesaistation of the moghal empirs during akbars i 1 means by the bt s 1 desrtbe s mal st flow vasthe orgaavzation of nobily usder akbar diflrent from that vader the sultane of detha how were the ceatral and provincial goveraments orgamsed.
during akbars g 7 who were the chel ocers of the.
governament st the local, provin sl and caniral lvels what wero e main features of akbars polcy towaeds the rajput kingdoms 7 flow far th suceeed  discuss, discuss the contbution of abat o the polieal uniication of orth india.
describe the evoluton of akbars rligious idess.
explaia the soncept of sk and s igmifince.
16 chapter xiv the deccan and south india up to 1636 we nave mentoned inan eacler chapter at followg.
the breskup of the buhmans kingdon, thre powerful sares, ahmadragar, bispur ad gelconda erged on the seee, aod that they ombised o crush vispansgara a the batle of basnuto, vear tabkota, 1565, afer the vetory, the deccen states reumed theic old ways.
both abmadnegse and bispur clmed shoapur whih vas neh wed el tract nedher wars nor marsage allasces betveen the two coold reolve the ue.
borh the sates had the ambiton of conqueing bdar.
abmadnagar o wated t sanex beca the norh.
in st 25 the descendants of be old behmani s, the nizam shas clamed s sopencr, f dot begemonstc posiion in the deccan, thee i was contested o oaly by biapu butalso by the ulersof gojart who had their e on the rich konkan ares, i sdtion to besar.
the ujuatrles actnely aded bear apuinst almadnagar, aod even capaged n var agunst ahmadnagae o order at the exising bulane of power i the dezean was r0t pse, biapur and golcond chshed over e poses son of naldrg.
the mugial conquest of gujarat m 1572 ated  nen sialion.
the congueit of guerat could have been  prelade o the mughal conguestof the decean.
but akbar was busy clewhere and did not wan, at thal sage, 0 mierfers 1 the deccan alfin.
ahmsdnagr ook advantige of the stua ton toassex becar.
in fuct, ahmadnagar and biapsr came to an agreement where by biape was e fiee o oxpand it dommons in the south at the expmse of vijsysnagara, whie ahmadusgsr overran bera.
golconds, 00, was ntersied 1 exteding s terrtore l the o of vijay agaa.
an the deccanl states were, thus, expan asother featue of the situation was the srowing imporuance of the marathas in the al of the deccan.
as we bave seen, e maratha tzoops had slvays been employed 35 toose auliaces or bargies ssually caled borgs inthe babrusi kingdom.
the revenue afurs ac the local level wersinthe hands of e deccani bahrsanas.
soree of the od mauina gmiles whch fose in e servoe of he babwani rulers and deld mansabs and jages from them wete the more, nombalkar, ghatge, es.
most of them were powertul zmindarsor dehamukds 0 they wese 8 e and s0uth di called n the deccan.
however, walke the rajputs, none of them wa a1 independent ik, o rled over aege kingdom.
secondly, they were ot the eaders of clans on whose backing snd spport hey could depend.
hesce, many of the marstha sardars sppear o bave been miliary adventsrers who were prepared o s thec loyaly accordn o the drevuling wind.
nevetheles, the marsthas tormed he backbone of th landed azstocracy ofthe desoan sad had position it 1o the o hld by the rajputs n larg pacts of north tnda.
durng the middie of the sstenth ceatuy, the rles of e deccas salcs embark  upon a deimte polcy of waning ovr the marathas o the sde.
the maraths chiels were accorded serves and postions in 4l the hie lesding sates of the deccan.
torshum adi st of b who ascended d theone in 1555 was the ladeng avocat of i policy.
10 is smd tha he eniertuned 30,000 mratha ausiliares brgi m s army, and showed gt favour 1o the marathas i the revenue sysem.
he 1 supposed 1o have sodueed marath m revene accounus st all el apurt from increasing his favours 16 old bl 4 fow oher fumibes ek 32 e bonssls who ha the fanily same of ghor.
pade, the dates or chavans, tc.
3l rose o prommence n biapur a8  et of this poly.
mabarashian bakmanas were regu tary s or dplomatic negotations s wel thus the ulle of pehwa was accorded fo bratinara, kankoji nard, by the ruen of abmadagar.
marshas played o mporiant ol the stes of ahmidnagar and gojkonda el it will thus e seen that the policy of aying with ol andod and miliary cuses had been mitated by the descam ralrs.
v beforo sech  plley was implemnted by e moghalsunder ak, 1 mughil advance tovards the decean i waslogial 0 xpeet s mughal sdvance ovards the deccan after the corsoldaion of the empre i north tndia.
althowgh the vindhyas dwvided the noxth and the out, was ot an nsurmounable e trevlln, merchandue, pigims and wandeang.
saon rad shvays pased becween thenort 3. the south, making the two culually o, though cach had s e disncae suleal fstore.
the conguest ofthe deccan by e teghlaqs and the umproved communcatons betvesn te rorth and the south had i o srenghening of the commercal an cultl retions detwcen the twe.
afterthe dclve of e dels suaat, many sull suats s0d pesons search of enploymant had migsod to court of the babman rulers pl s, the morth and st were nt sected.
as have seen, the rulers of guprat and malwa the wet, 3ad orusa n he ast had b co8 inualy avolved i the poio of south tndis honce, afr e conquest of mavaasd guprit 1 the g and erly 10, he maghals could iy hve ke theseles aloot from decean polites.
in 1576,  maghal army mvaded kbandes, and compelied e rulrs of khandesh o bt however, urgest mattees caled akbar elevhere.
for wvehe jeac, betwean 1516 ad 159, akbar bned a1 tahore, vashing the northowistas stusion 1n th el s 1 the decean detrorted.
the desan vas 3 scthing caulron of polies, war betweenthe vanous deceans sales wasa feguent ocowreaee the death of s uler ofien ed.
to factonal fghts among the obles, wit each party tyag to actas fingmaler.
in s howiity becween te deccants ard the newsomers ofoss o gharfound fre play.
among the descans, o, the habatus abysinis of arces and afihuns formed spacaic groups.
thee 16 oo and fuctions had e contat with he e wnd caltre ofthe peole of the repon.
the proces ofthe asimiation o the marahas isto e mibtary and poleal system ofthe deccan saes which had sared earer 6id sot make much hesdway.
the rulers asd the nobies, hesore, commandsd e loyalty from the seople.
the stsaton was worseed by sstaran conticts andconfroveris.
towards te begin in of e cestry, shise became the state lgon o 1ras under new dysasy called the safhid dyvasy.
shism had beee 8 sppressed st for 4 joog me, avd i the frt fush of cathusinm, e votais of the sew sctindlg o in a good deal of persecuton of their cowhie ppeeents.
as 4 resul, members of many emicent flis fd to tndit and sought el the courtof alsae who rade o disiochon betwecn shias and sumsis.
some of the deccant sses, noably golconds, dopted stiim 3 8 siate weigion.
at the ot of biapur and.
ahmadnagar, 00 he shite party was sicong, but was able o prevsil aly fro tme e, this rosted o beighened pacty sinfe.
mabdawi deas had aso specad widly in the descan.
the mosms belived that m every epoch s man o e fusly of he rophetwil make a0 sppearaace and wil streogthenthe elgon, and make jste .
such 4 erson vas called.
the mahdi alsoogh many stahdis had appeaed ia digrent countis at ffest s, he end of the.
st oo of ilac whh was du towards the end ofthe sinteah ceatury had raied.
expeciaions throughout the liam workd.
i ndis, one saiyid mubsimad, who was bora a jauapur inthe st bl of the aeeth cntuy,pro dlmed bumself o be the mahd.
suyid mabammad traveliedwidly sl ove inda aod.
it i word, aod crated grat cathu sasm.
he estblished s daias circes i fferat parts of the couniy, cluding.
he deccan whershis ideas found el sol the orthodox dements wee a bitely opposed 0 mahdswsm 13 fo shism, though ther was 50 love o between the v, it wat i ths contxt that akbac bad pat forvacd the concet of ki, he was afid that the biter socarian fvalres peevaiing o the deceanisates would il over o the mughal empire.
arbar was alo apprehensive of the grown.
power of the portguese.
the portugaci had ben interfring in plgim trafio to meca, ot sparing the roys ldics.
1a thee terrtores, they were carrying on prowiytizag sctviics whih akbar dked  they were constantly o708 10 cxpund i positons on the  1, and had even rcd o lay theic band 00 surat which was sved by th tmdly arcval of o maghil commander.
akbar apparenly tt hat the coordination aad posing of the resources of the deccantsaes under mughal supervison woukd check,if noteiminate,the portsgues danger.
those wece some of the factors whieh impeld akbar o avolve dimelf in the docean s, conguest o bera, abmadiagnr and kbaodesh akbur laimed szerinty owe th enire couniry.
e was, therefore, eca tha ke the ralputs, th rles of the deccan states shosld ackooviedge his suzemioty esbasses sent by kim ealier suggesing that the deccani states recogns his power ad be fiends with him, dd not, howevr, produce any posive sl 1t was obvious that the decousi sates would not aceept moghal suseranty gl the mughals weze 1  postin 0 exert miltary prosare a thes.
in 191, atber lausched diplomato 8 dr ayd 00th pta et i 8 o e g e o 8 s i s et e e b o ly e e s 5 sy bl o e i e b i  mg e o  e o e e iy el b a t e o e t e i et t e s e o e e oo bt sl 155 ey t s o7 1 e b e b g x ot s i e e e o e gl oo o bk eyl e t o e irt sl gt el ik t8 yo s s e e 8 il e b b, ot e s t, d fomiad e e b 1 i o s e 1 u e o by b t e i e d e il sy s i st b al bt ey s i 165 o, the two sides came 053 aprecment.
it e areed o cedo brar 10 the mughsiin feuen for e recogaion of the cam of batidar.
maghal sarraiy e adorcop aied.
this was ia 1556, obstcis in che mughals takiog posession of berar.
soon,  combned force of bispar, goleonda and abmaduagar jed 5y biapur commander nvaded berae m sreoplh.
fn hard ought bae fa 1557, the maghas defoted s deceam foroe e tives thei umber.
the biapuc 434 goeonda ot now withdrew, laving chind i sloneto meetthe o aibough chand b wis nfavour of oberving he traty o 156, he coul ot sop humsing atacks oa the mughals n berar by he oobles.
this ealed n  second moghal sioge of ahmadeager, t th sbence of say hlp from a0y quartr, chund biropened aegoiatons wih the mughals.
she was, howevr, meued of treschery by 4 howin facton bed murdered.
this caded e e of oue of tbe mom romastic agures in decean ol the maghals sow ssaited 1nd captored abmad.
oagar.toe boykung.
bubadur, vas sea 15 he fortres of gulor.
bulghar, o0, was added o the empive and  moghal grivon it wtoned 3t absadosghs.
thi vas i  the fal of abmadnagar and the capare of bubadur nizam s g4 not sove akbars preblems o the deccan, there wassow o nizam stabi prive or soble with st staoding 0 pegunt with.
al e e s, he mughals were 201 nchaed 0 dvence 166 beyond ahmadsage, o try o seiz all the renainiag trrtorie of the sse.
the s tion became frtherconfused due 0 comsant ranglog ameeg the mughl commeade to stdy the stuation on the spat, akbar advanced nto malws and then 1o khaodesh taere b et that he new uler of kbandesh had not showa.due repe o prnce daviyal when e had passed through m temory on s vay 1o abmadoagar.
akbar was alio ke o secure the fortof assgarh i khan e v wes reputed to b th srongest tot 1 the deccan al tghtsge, sad whent pestenco had broken out, the ruler came ootand sureadeced 161, khandes e okorported m the mughalerpes, ar the captire of assgars, axtur recurned to the noreh to dealwi e rebelion it soa, suimn.
alhough the conqest of kandess, berur sad baagha, sod moghal control ove the fort of abmaduagar were sobstantal achevement, e moghals had yet 1o comolidatetherr pontionaxbor was con cious tht 0 lasing slatea 10 the dossan problem coul bo srived st without .
sgice ment with b he,heeloe, ot messages st apurances 1o t adi shab 1, who.
offced to marry off s daughier 0 prace daniyal, the youngest sonof atbar.
but soon ater the marrage 160, th proce ded of cxcene draing.
thes the svaton  the descan cemained sebulous, and bad 10 be acied by akbar scemsor, jhange.
rie of malk ambar andfrostaton of meghal attt at consoltion afic the ll of abmaduagat and cxpiste of babadur nam shub by he moghals, the e of almadnagar would ave disntegated.
a4 dren purs of  would bave, .
all probabilty, been swallowed 4 by the pegh bouring sses but f the e of 8. mariat man, mk ambar.
malk asbac wis s abysnian, bors in ehiopis.
we do mot now moch sbout bs eary e and caree.
teseem that s pooc parents sod him at the save market of maghdad.
i cours of e, e was purchased by  merchant who treated um wel 204 brosght b 10 the deccan whieh was land of promse.
malk ambar roso fa the service of cangez kb, one of the famos and wsentsl nobles of mortaza noam stah.
when tho mughals invaded ahwadnagar, ambar at st weat 1o bjpar oty i ek tere.
bt hosoon came back and excoled sl 1 the powerful habibi.
abyuinos party which was opposed 1o chusdbiow afic the fall of ahmadnagar, malik ambar found a nizam shah prince aad ith e tacit support o the ruke of bijapar, selhio up a5 mortaza nissm shah i, with himel s the pesha il which had been common ia abimdnagar much caler.
mulk ambar gathered around bim  lrge band of maraha troopes or bargis .
the marathas wereadept 1 rapd movermant, and troops.
alhosgh ths guerily mode of war.
fare was tadional wih the mrathas inthe deccan, the maghals were not used 0 it with the hep of the marathas, anmbar made 8 il fo e mughal 10 consolidate teic positon 12 bear, abmaduagar sod balghat.
the mughal commandee.in he descan 3t the e was abdur rahim khanikharan, 3 shacwd and wily polician and sa abe soder.
ho inflcted a crusing defeat on ambar fn 1601 in telingana a1  pace called nander, honever, ne gecded 10 make uends with ambar snce he considered 1 denrable that ghere should be some siabilty m the reman g nizam shab kingdom.
in bis tors, arbar alo faund 1t useful t cultate the friendiup of he kbankbanas sine it esabled him 1o s deccan and s0uth ddia deal it his otersal sival.
howerer, aftr h death of akbar, when the osiuon of the mughils in the doscan became.
weak ds fo dificences among the mughsommander ambar wileashed a flree campgn 0 cxpel the mughalsfrom berar, balaghataod at nagar.
in this enerprise b was helped by torabim adi shal, the rle of bispur, vho considerd .
necesiary that the nizam st ate should contome 55 4 buffr between biapur and the mughal.
he gave ambar e poverulfort of qundhar in teingana.
for e rendence of s famly and for sormg tressures, provisons, e he alio senthim 10000 horsemen for whose supporta.
deiite s of teriory was 1o be setapart the ety was cementad by  marrige allance between the daughir of one of e leding eiopanebles of bapur with malik ambar, the marags wes ceebrsicd i 1609 ith grest reocing.
the al shah giving  handsome dowry 1o the bride and spending about r 80,000 0n reworks alone.
fortited wily the support of biapus, and with the actve s of the marathas, ambar soon foreed kiunskhunan to.
reireat to burhanper.
thus, by 1610, all the gams in the deccan made by albarwere lost although tabangsc seat g rince parvez o the deccan with a large ary, he couk not meet the chalnge posed by malik.
ambar.
even abmaduagic was lox, and pacves hid 10 conclude a disgracefl peace with ambar.
the alfins of malk amibat contmued to prosper and.
the mughly were not e o st themielves a5 long ushe had the sold support of the marathas and oter clemeats butin coure of tume, malik ambar became amogant and siesated has alies.
the khankhasan, who fad again beca postcd 35 the moghal vieroy of the deceat, took advantage of th suation and el won over to his side number of habikis sad maratha obles such 45 jagder rai, babai kate, udaji ram, et ahangie hmsell was wellaware of the value of the marathas, for he obsersed in s memois gt the masathas are 3 hardy iok and vho sre the conte of resutnce uit comaty, witk the elp of the muraha sardams, the khavi khanan iahcied a crushng defcat on the combined foces of ahmaduagar, bispue sad golconda 1 1616 tae moghils ocupied e new nizam shaht capital, kb, ad bant al s buidogs before they lef.
this defeat thook the deccani allance sgemat the mughals.however, ambar dd ot reux s efors.
to compicte e kbantkaanans vitory, jbangie seo a grand acmy wadr bt son, prince khisram aier shah jaban 13 himslf moved 1 masdy 1o sapport the prnce 1615. faced with s theal, ambs had 30 option but 10 sbmit.
itis sigaicast, hew eves,that 1n the tresty jehange dd 5oty o calarg e conquest made by a in the decean.
this was sot due 1o soy miliary weakacss or the part of jahangi, a1 bas baen somstimes imagined, but due o debberte policy.
appareatly, jahangir 4 ot vant to extead moghal commitnant i the deccsn, o become 00 decply embroiled i fsafiis.
moceover, b wass 4 hopeful tat n mode ration would cnable the decani ates to sete down, and live in peace with the mughals.
as a part of bis plcy, ahaogic e 1 win over duspor o is side,and sent 2 grcioss farman 1o a sk caliog him desprethese cevrss, ambar consinued o jeud the deccun esstance sgaistthe moghas and thre vas 20 pesc in the decess.
how.
ove, two years late, the combined deccasi torees agan sufred  severs delet a8 the hands of the mughas.
ambar had f rstore allthe maghal teriteie, and anothe 14 ks of adoising teitory.
the descani staes had togay sa indemaity of rs.
s000000.
the credit for these vieores was given o prace st jakan, thi svond defer, coming 0 soon afer e it fnally shacared the snited frout of the do states sgalot the mugals.
the old riviis among the decean.
sstes were ow resmed.
ambar conducted 4 trie of campaiges againt.
bjapor for the recovery of shaapur wheh was  bone of contestion bewsn the two stses.
by 4 rapud movement ambar esched the biapur capital, burnt he e capital of naurspur b by toahim adil sta, and orced i 0 e for sheler to.the o this might be regarded the climax of ambars pover.
altough amber showed resuriable mitary skil, snergy a0d.
determinaion, his achivemants were shortlived due o hi ia by or unwilingsess to come 0 e with the mughals.
the chiel wgaicasce of the e of ambar, bowerer, is that it fepre sesied  clet recoqnition of the importiace of the maathas in deccasi afiis.
the e of the maruthas under the kndeciip ofmalik ambar e them confdesce which coubled thes 1o lay an.
ndependent role ate on.
malk a red o improve the admiie traion of the nizm sha ste by otroduc ng todarmals sytem of lod revenve.
ho sbolishd the old sysem of giving jand on contret jara which was ruinous for the peasasis ad adopled b sabi syt a 1622, when the deccas was in turmoil due o the rebelion of price stah taban aint jahusgir, mallk ambar was sble o recovr oace agaia many of the ol ter.
fories which had been codod 0 the mghah, jubangies attempt ot covsclidaing the mighal posiion ia the doccan was, thus, frostrsted, however, the longange beoels 10 ahmad aagar for reopening the dispute with the mughis may be consdored doubiful.
ttled o the sicuaton.
1n whih sha jahan decided thot he had o altenativebut 0 extinguish abmadoagar as an mdcpeadent state, malik ambar breathed s lat in 1626 u theripo ag0of 80, but the biter s of hs kogaey had o bo eaped by his succssors.
extoction of abmadsagar, nd accepiance of mughal sezersity b bijapar aod golconda.
stat jaban asconded the throne in 1627, havisg commasded two expeditions o the doccan 55 3 prince and spent a copsderable period in the deccan during his robellon sguist bis futber, shah jahan had mch ex percace 4 personsl knowiedgs of the decean and i pofiin shah jabass frst concern 0. rler was o recover the teritorie n the doscan which had been lost 0 the nizam shab ar, for the purpos, b deputed an od wd experienced oble, kbanjahao lodi.
however, khamt jahas lodifuiled in the catorprse, 1ad was realled 10 the court.shorly afervards, b rebeled aad foined the nimm sish who depued him 1o expel the mughte from he remaining portions of becar and balaghat, giviag aylum o 3 leading mghal sobl malik ambars deats, hispolicy o reusiog to recogaie the mughel position fa berar sad balghat wasbeing contiased by the nimm st rulr.
shah i, threlor, camo 10 the conclusion that thre could be 5o pese for the mughals i the deccen t ong ss almadsagar contined s un independeat tte.
this was o mujor departuro from the poiicy which had bosn folowsd by akber aad jabaag.
how over, shab jaban was 20t kaen 1o cxtend mughal terotorics in the deccan beyond wht wasabscktly necesary.
he, derefore, wrote o the bispur rler ofenng fo cede 1o hm roughly osehird of the ahmadnagar saie 1t e would cooperate ith the mughal 1 the projcted campaign aginst abmadnagar.
this et 3 hrewd move on the part of shah jaan o olae abmadnagar diplomaucallysnd midarily.
he also sent fecers 0 the vanous marath sardars 0 o moghal service ac fis, shah jahan.
wessucsessol 1 his overtures mailk ambar hid defsted 3nd killed somepromnent brjapur nobies desing.
his carpaigin the adt shah b was smarting at the humiltion of the burning of nauraspir and the snnexaton of sholapar by malk ambar.
he,thercfoe, accepted shah jahaas proposal and poted an srmy at the nimam stahi berdr 10 cooperate wih the mugals.
around s e, jadhay rao, a promivent maratia moble who had deletd o the sde ofthe maghals durng the reign of jahings but hadgone buck 1 the serve of the nuam sk, s tracherously murdered o8 3 chargs of conspeing.
with the mughals, as s rsil, st bonsae who was hot soninlew nd he futhr of shiva ceectod 1 the mughil side slong with s retions.
shab jahas secorded iy massab of 5005, and gave n juges m he poon region.
a mmber of o prominest maratha sarars ao.joad sl jaban in 1629, shah jahan doputed arge s against ahmadoagar, one of them 1o operie i e west in the balaghar region, snd the other m a0 st 1n the teingaza repon.
the emperor sl moved o burhanpur o coondamte thir  movements.
under leness presare, farge partsof the abmad magr i wee brought nder mughal oo peton.
farcada, ose of the st outposs of the kingdom, was besiged.
the nasm sha now sent 3 picous appea to he ag shab, satng thet most of the kiagdoms was under mughal ceupstion, and if parends 1  would meaa the end of the num sha ynasy, aler e, he warned, would come the tum of biapur.
a strong proup st the biapur court iad boen uneasy at the seady mughal dvance in abmadnagar.
in fuct, the bjapari forees at the border had merely watched the situston, tking n0 sctive part i the mughal opertions the mughals, on thelr part, bad e o hand ove 0 he adil shah e aras slioted to hum under the sgreement.
as  e, the adi shub made 8 somarmst asd decided to el the nezam shah who agreed 10 rendes sholspur 0 hom.
th s in the politcal sivation compelled the muglals o fame the sitge of parendn, and 1o et however, the teenl stuston m abzadogss ow furned 10 fuvest of the mophss.fah khea, the som of malle ambar, had ecely been apponted pesiwa by e nizwm shat in the o that b would be al lo ndoce siak jahan o make pesce.
tmtert, fata kban psaed secvl negotitions w1y stk jahan a0 3t o etance, mardre o nizam s, ., put  pappet on the tarne.
he alio 1. s mo, 3o siruck the ko n the rame of he mogha smperor, s 3 rovard, fath woaa was tken m mughal sevie, and the 1t acoundpoona.
previnuy albted to s wot traafred o n as  rosl, shab et om  vel side.
thess evens ok place 1 1 aftsr 1 i 31 of futh khan, shan inbn apponied n a0 kban as mughal vicery of e dxc 1l bl retarned to agrs, matbd k, el wih the com.
binedopposiicn of ipur andthe local nimm shab nabl.
inciing shaki, toomd himelf i very diul seistion.
pareods m surendered 1o bfsur which mades strong bid for the fort of daulaabad 18 wel by ofirmg lage sam f money o fath khan forsuresdeing the fort.
elienhar aio, the moghals fousd 1t el  hald oa f0 s postions.
te il thos be seen tat the maghals sad bipur were, rsiy, ngaged n contest fur dividing theprosrae body of abmaduagsr butween theaves.
the adi sha sent  jrge sumy under randsla khan and morah pandt fr the surendor of daiatabad and for promsoning 145 grrion.
sl sho was exlled in biapurs servke to barass the saghls and o of tha sipples.
but the combined opertions of the bispuri foces 3nd sati were of no aval, mahabst khan closly vt daulatabad, 1nd frced the urion o secrender 1639, the nizar shaly s st 0 prson in galor.
this marked thecnd of the nirsm st dymasty.
how ovr, evn ths dd not solve the problems g e maghis.
following the example of malk ambar, skabi found a nzam stahi prince, nd risd im up s rer.
the adi shah st 4 fore of seen 10 erght thowsand borsemen 1 aid shah, 2 inuced many of the nizam shai nobie o surreade e fots fo shbji.
many disbanded nizsm shahi solden joined shabji wbase force swelled to 20000 horse.
with these be harasied the maghals and took control ofage porions of the abmadnagar sse shah jban now desided 1o give personal atetion 10 th problms of the deccan.
he tlied that the crux of he situaion was e attiuds of bispur.
he, gereur, depte eda g acmy to.invade bispur, and alto bt felrs o the a stah, ofeing fo rovive e cclie accord of dvding the tre.
tory of abmaduagar between bispor and the maghin the poley of carot and sick aad the sdvases of shah jahan f0 he deccan brought sbot another change in byapur polvcs.
the leaders of the antimaghal group isclading marar pandi were diplaced nd.
illd and 3 new treatyor abdam was entersd o wih stab jaben, accordmg to thas sy, the ng shah agreed 10 rcopnse.
moghl suser.
ity 0 pay an ademalty of tweaty lakhs of rupees, and ot to interfere n the afues of golonda which was brought under mughal protection.
any quarre between bijapor and golconda was, 1 the ftur, to be refered fo the mugha emperor for s arbaraton.
the al shal sgreed 0 operate withthe mughals forreducmg shab 1o submsson, 204 1f be aureed 1o fon bispur servic, 1o depute in in the south,away from the moghal fronuer, in reurn for thee, teriory worth about 20 akh s bout sighty lach rupess amnaally belonging to abmadnagar wasceded o biape shah jabaa alo sem to adi shah 8 solema.
farman mpresed with themark of the emperors palm that the terms of tus reay o eve be iolted.
stah jahan compeid th sttement of the doccan by entring o treaty with goloonda aswel the raler agreed o nclude he pame f skah jan in the ehu and 0 excude the pame of the nnian mperor from 4. the quib sha was 0 e loyal to the emperor.
the annual trbate of fose akh e wheh goleond was previously paying s remied.
tosead, 4 vas 1 pay two ki huns amnually 1o the mughal emperor i rtarn for his peotecton.
the teates of 1636 wih bispu sad gol conds were satemanlie.
in et they enabled siah jahan to reale the uitimate sbjetives of akbr the suzersnty of the mughl cnperce was now soeepted over the jengh 04 bresdeh ofthe country.
pesce with 7um e d south do the mughals embied the deani staes 1o expuad.
their terrtoies tovards the south and lo stan chimax o e power and prospesy during he ext o dcades.
it decad following th wests of 1635, digur 1ad goloonda.
ovrran the rch and tetle karmataka area from e river krisiaa o tanjos and beyond.
this area was aied ove by  number of ptty hinda pricipaliis, oy of them, such s the nayaks of tazjos, t od madura, oving romial llginc t6 the ryl th former ler of viayasagars.
a i of campaign wersconduced by bt and golconda sgaist thee stes with the hep of shah jahan, they agreed o drmde the temsorisand he p0lssaned by thei armies inthe proporion 1273 o biapur and 113 1 goleonda.
despie fequent quarrls betwen th o he sk ofconquest et ahead thas, s short san o e, th terrkores of thse o statesmore than doubled s they reached thecimas ofther power and prospety.
i the e hd been ble 0 consobdate het hod ver the aeas they had conquere, the deccan would have s a long ea f peace.
unfortan sy, rapd xpansion wedbend whave inir.
al cohenon thee sates had.
anitioss nobes i s sha, and s s shiva in bior a0 miejoris, the eadng nobe n golcosds, arted carving out spheres of insance for themscives.
the moghils, 00, found that the e of pomer in the deccss had been paet and demanded 8 prie for ther benevolent e iy durng the cxpansionnt acivis of these e, t developmenis came 08 head 1656 olowin the dath of mukarmad adil sha,and the sernal of asrangaed 1 he mo alvioy of the deccas.
thee developments would be del with m 8 subsequent chapier cataral conebaton of he decean staes the deccai ttes had 2 nsmberofcutral m conbutons to e credt.
al a shah  1580 loved to hid discosions wis hiods od.
musim sins aod was alled sus.
he favi ed cathoe.
musionarie o h ourt, ever efore akbae ad done so.
he had anexe ent by to which he appoised the wel.
now samkeit holar, wasan peadi ptro e of s e v s iy the sucosisor of alf adl stab, torshin agii s t 15601627 asended e o atthesge ol mne.
he mas vary siiions of thepoor,and hadthe wle of abl babs, ot fricad of the peor.
ho was dcply ferest.
e tnime, 4nd compored  sock culkd kitah owas in whichsongs wee st o  ous musel modes or ragar.
he b gapil, nuuraspu, 1 whch 3 arge uber of mupsians were mted 1 s t i song, b oy voked the oddes of muse and learn g, saramvats, dun o his road spproach came 0 be called jager gurs.
he.
siconded patronageto i, inciding hinds ssts and temples.
tis icloded grans o pandarpur, thecetre of the worship of visoha, whick became e cenze of the bhakt moverent s mabarashrs, the broad, tolerast poley followed by toratim agh shah 11 wascontnued snder his suscesors the important re played by marata fules in the service of tho abmad i sae s scady been mesioned, the quib shaks,too s the servees of both hindos nd musime for mitary, stz ive2nd diplomati purposes.
usder tosbim quib st d. 150, murahari rao rose 1o the postios of pekwa n the inglom, pos tion which was second ony to that of m jumiof wazir.
the nayakwars who formed the mularycurandd ceres, had been 3 powee n the kinglom ever s the founda gon of the ynasy, from 1672 3 s absorp m tion by the moghal n 1987, the adminisira tive ad ity afftin of the sate were dominated by e bothers, madanm and ity gokconds was the miclitunl resortof siterary .
sulan mabamead qulr quitb st who was s contemporay of akbar, was very fond of erarure and arhiecure.
the sl vas vt only o grat pation o ar and et bot was 3 peet of 10 mean order he wrot i dokbin urds, pecsan and teogy and et  extenive dia o soliction.
he.
was the fr 10 mieodoce  secalar ke poetry.
agart from th praise of god asd the prophe,be ote sbout ratre love, a5 the socil e of s day.
the growth f usdo 1n it dakiuns form wap sigifant deelopment g he peiod.
the sscssos o moham mad qull qutb shab snd mary et poets asd writes of the time adepied urds a5 ty liomage.
in addion toperuan, these wrers drew o hind and telus for forms, o and henes s wel s rocabelry.
urdwas patrnised a the bijspori cout i the poet learate nuself vho fourihed du 8 the madle of the sventeath centry weote fomantc tale sbout prnce manohat, rulr from the do, urd o t ot o st qi qi s comtrved ey bl e mon tamons v e ot i, completed 505 1 oot a1t ftheoew o hydenbad fenied by qull qi s e oty s, g e four restions.
t chat sy s fou maurts whch e coursonty and e 4 e .
the eube s o skt e xvings.
the ol of bipu conmteny e igh sar ni e e a1 s kore the mont famons biaper b of b yerios e i raz and e gol guls t ot v  mamaeem ot o a sah s hows o sl 1 b t g g i was b 1640 e gt e dome v onse wd al proporions sre oo, e o doc ey i by, aprios e ot h ot t i 3 vt et on i of e g roo b tt ey e ter e tt i o e st e do s e e  e bandarf o et s and o comied n e o ne, et and b, exercises 1. deseie the s fsturesofthe poiticl condions i the desean afe the ofthe visyesagara kingdom.
2. asss th sccesss of the mughals i the dvccan durg the oiga of axbar.
3. duse the o played by malk ambar i the polital afics of the deccan.
4. decrite the expaion of the moughal enpce i stub jahen.
e decean during the reign of 5. it th chievmeats of the deccan kingdoms fa the ik of culture., chapter xv india in the first half of the seventeenth century ol 204 admisstrane.
derdlopocats fa inda.
the rnst balf of the seventeath satury in india vas, on the whole, 30 ena of progress and growia, duing the pertod, the mughal pire vas ruid by two capabe ulrs, bz it 160527, and shah jabaa 16281659 in southern tndi, 100, a5 we have sen, e e of bijsgur and gokoonda were abie 10 providscondtons of interal peace and cltr wgrowt.
the mughal rulrs consolcsied the admiistrnive system which had devloped under anbar.
they maintained the lince withthe rajpets, ad tred o futher broaden he polical buse of the cmpice by llying wih poverfl sctoss such s e afyhass and the marathas they embellshed hes copials withbesanfol budings, mary of them in marble, and tned o make the moghal court the cnie ofthe clfual e in the cousty.
the moghalsplayed a posive ol n stabils ing indis reatons withneigsbouring assn povers such a3 jran, the usbeks, and.
the ocomaa turks, thercby opening vp st avenuesfo indiss foreiga trade.
trade con cesions given to various europesn txdng compaes wecsaio simed t promotiag ldias forign trade.
but .
number of negative fsturescae o the suface during the pecod.
the yoving prosperty of the rlig classe 4 ot ler down o pessant and workers.
the mughal rulsg closs resaioed oblviovs ofthe growth of sencesnd schncloy i the west the probies of scoesion 10 the hrone crated by, hos poing theat 10 the polal sysie 25 wel 2 o te economc nd caltral developmnt.
iahange the st on of aker, sacceed o to the throne without ay ccuky, his yousger beothers havig died docing e e time of akba due 0 xcssve deking, how eve, shordy afier jahangs socesion.
bis edes son, khusan, broke ot into reellion.
tusse betwen fthe 2 s0n for the throne was 5ot sl s mes,  jbaogie b el b reelled agunst st and ket e empre dsturbed for some e, however, kusaws eblion proved o be shorlved.
sahangi defened him at  atde sear lahore nd s00n sfterwards be was capteed ssd  prcacd.
wo have ateady sen how jehagic eought 0 an end the contict with mewar which had contoned or fou decads, ad the wrug sl the dicown with mallk ambar vho was ot prepard to accept he selesent mado by ak, there was conlt in he s, too, altiogh abas had broken the back of the powee o the afghans in i regon, alghan chies were 4l powerful in various arts of castbengal they had th support of many b 58 of the rero, uch s he ras of jesore, kamup vesern assam, kachr, .
towardsthe end of i rega, akbar bad e  ot s mas s, the goversr of bengal, o thecourt, and dring i abaeocs the afghan hief usman khao 20 hers ound sa oppor ity o e rebfon.
jabangic st back man singh for seme time bat the stuaiion contined to worse.
tn 160, jaangs poted o beaga, t khan, te grandson of skaikh s i, the famovs suf sint who was e ptcon sint of the moghals.
i khan baadled he stvaion wih st eaeegy s0d.
foresight.
he won ove many of he amidars iacluding the raa of jesore 1o i side 320 faed n beadquaries ot dace, which was stegeally locte, o desl with the reels.
ho fst irced b elfrs o e conquest of sonareson which wes sader the contrl of mo kb and bis confedeates who were clled the b tvelve by, afe tree yoasof cumpuignisg, sosargacn was captard.
soon aferwus, mos kbaa surendered o be as st 0 the cout s prisone.
the o of sz kb came 2, aod be was dafented in a gerce batt, the back of the alghen resisance was zow beoken and the other ebels woon ssrenderd.
the principal on of jessor and kararp werauoered.
thos mughal power was fraly catrenched i eat bengal to kocp the area under fll contol, e provincia captal was ransfrredfrom rajmbal o dicca which bogas o develop apidy.
lits akbar, jubagie ruled that conguest ould e lsin oa the ass  of force 3t of ecurig the goodwil of the peope, e, thre e teated the dfeated afphan chics nd i ellowers with consdertion sad.
sympa .
afesome time, many of the princes snd smindacs of banga detaised a the court s lssed and allowd 10 etura 0 beoal.
eveo muss k was rlosed nd s ctates wrs rstored.
thusafe s loag sl peioe 124 pospeity retursed to bongal t cap the prosess, he afghass als now began o be nduced oo the mughal nobiliy.
the iead ing afghan nobl under jahsagre vas khaas jaban lodi who reodered disingushed servics e decsa.
by 1622, tahange brought mtk asbar to o, pochod vp the long drawn out tusle itk mewss, aod pacified beopal.
jabangic s sl iy youn 5, 324 long ers of potce soemed fo b ahead, but tho stuation s changed radically by two developments the pecias congeest of qandar which was 3 blow to moghal prstige, and the growing illare of jdngcs heath which uglashed the lteat sirugge for sueccsen among the prices,and jockeyng fo pover by theaobles.
these  devlopaents pichorked not jahas ato the poliicalareo.
n s tho story of nur jahans b, ber fint marage wilh 2n tasian, sher afghan, aad hisdeath i clash with the mughal overnor of bengal nur jahaas sty 1 agra wih 30 ey relaon of jakangir, and her marriage with jahasge foue yeas i 1611 aze 100 ell knom 0 be ropsted i deal hore.
sober ritring do ot beleve that jahasger was responsibe for he dath o he st usband.
inbacgies chases mestng with her .
the mecaa baar ad marrying b was 50450 al her fndy was  espeotate one and het ichr, timadoddanls, had beea made joint divan by jabuagi in the fre year of i reign.
after a bref eipe dse o the nvolveent of oneof ki soms with khcaus rebellon, he had ben rsored o is postion.
haviag beca tesd inthis offe, andfallowing nay jubans mariag with jahasgi, he s raised o the ofice of the chiel divan.
et members of te fumly ako benfted from thi allanc, thec momab being sugmented, nimad vdl x t first ralp of tie seventsents century.
uddaula proved o be sble, competeat and o, and wilded consideraie aluece in tho ffie of the sato il his death ten yers it nor jabans brother, asf khag, was alo 8 iscoed sad sl man.
m was appoiied the khansaman, a post resrved for sobles i whorm the emperor had fll ontidence.
a year s, be married hi dusghter t0 khurram siah jahan who was s fuhers fovounte tolowing the ebelion 3nd imprisonment of khsarao some modern historass are of the opiion.
that along wih he fatherand beother, a0d allasce with khurmam, noe jahan formed a broup or yunia whioh masaped jahsagic s0 that bt ts beckung and support o one arer, and that s 1 to inio two facoonsthe n jaban jumia and it opponents.
1t 15 fusther agued that nor jahans poitea b tions ulimately ressited fa breach betweea her nd sha jahan, and that i drove shah jahan et rebllion gainst s fher i 1622, since he et that jabange was completly under nur jabansinieoce.
howerer, some other histriens do sot sgree wih gus.view, they poiat out that tl 1622 when jahangis besith broke down,al the iportant polteal dec 108 wecetaken by abangi hmsel 3 is cear from hissutobography.
the prece poltcal roke of nur jaban durag the period s not clar.
she dominated the 1oyl rousebold and st new fashions based on persian tadi ens.
o aceount of her posion, persan o sod cultur acquited restprestigs st tho ourt, or jtahan was the contant conpanion of jahangie, 1nd evea jomed him n s huntng expeditionssace she was 2 good der and  sue shot.
as such,she coud nfluence jahaa i and many people approached her 10 e cede wih the king on thee belal.
dut jahan 5 was st dependent oa the juma o on s nt iuhas, a s lso borae out by the fict that nobies who were a0t fvourie of the juna gontaued 1 g ther norml promatoss.
the s of shah jahan was due o his ersonal i axd sekeveneats rather tan the backng of nr johan.
shah jaba had b v sbtions o vhich fabangi wis ot va avare s any case, fn those times, 00 ruke could ufod o aow soble or pinceto become too powerful les e shallenge ki sathorty.
this s the s teson for the confict betwesn jsngir ad shah jahan.
sttan aars reversion aslong as khuseau wa live, be vas  potental vl to shab jhan.
but i 1621, sk juhan joed khusaa who had bees kept m bis castody and spread the oems that b ad died e o col. a e exriy icling that shah jehan was becomg 100 powertu, effors had been made o put fore ward his younger brodhe, shabryar.
shabe.
yar s marred o nu jabass caughier from e former husband, and given an im portat commasd.
1t wis these compiisted manoeuvees which ied 0 shah ahass robel lon.
t imediste cause of the rebllion was stk jabaos selisl to proeed to qundiar which had been beticgd by e pervans, shah johun wae afrid that e campai woud be 2 long and diffcul one sxd ut ntigies would be htched sgaiast b during s absece from the cour.
heoce, e put forward oumber of demunds a8l command o the army which includel the veterans of the docean, compiete eway over the punis, control over .
number of important fors, te.
juhang wis eoraged by s stitude conunced that the peies wes mediatingrebelion, b vrote leters 45d 100k pumtve seps whieh oaly made the atation worse and realed in 30 s open bresch.
from manda, where he was saioped, shah jbanmade 4 wddea duohon agu in order to captue the treasurs lodged thre, stk ahan had the fll backing of the decan.
semy and il the nobles posed s, guat asd malwa haddecared for i, a0d e had the sapport of s father indaw, asat khun, and 4 oumber of importent nobes 2t the  court, howewr, the mugin communder st apr s viglant  foled shah jahaa vho the oved 08 10 deli, howeer, by thi tine jahaagis bad ssembld  rge army sader the commend of mababat khan.
i th bacte tha fllow  , shab jhan was worsed snd s from s compiete dfeat by the alant sand of the mevar contingent.
mababat k was thea orderet o move on fo.
mandu mlwg, prioce parver bing appointed the nommai commander o the aemy.
another amy was et 1o wres gujrat from shah jakan stah johan was hounded out of the mughal teritorie and compulled to take sheter with hi rstuhle enemes, the deccasi rulere.
however, he cromed the decean into oris, took the govermor by surpite, and soon begal and b were undee his el mahabst khan was again presed ino service fiewar sked o lave the deccan and pro ceedt0 tho cast where alahabad was being teeateced by shah jahas.
he took caergetc step, 4nd e, shab jahan hd 0 reeeat to the deccanagaia, this fime he made o alliece with mallk ambar who was oace spin at war with the maghals.
shah jaban was wagned the sk of captaiog burbaspor from the moghals.
but shah jaban faied a the enterpise.
ho wiote st leters to jabsagir who l hat it wis time to pardon1nd concilte s ablestand mont anergtc o0, aspart of the sgreement, two f shah jhass som, dara sad avrangze, mere seatto the cout as hostaes, and  et in the deccan was asigned for shab jabass expenes.
this wes fn 1626, manaear kiax shah jahans resellon kept the empire et fo four years, resulted i he s of quadhar, and emboldened the deceanis to recovr il the terrtoris surreadered 1o he moghals derng akbars tme nd i subsequeat campaign.
tt alo poiated fo 4 busic weak et of the ystema socsesl prince.
tended o become s fvl foces of power, paticular iy when it was it that the moarch wia not sbicor wiling t0 wield the supreme power e, shab jahaxs comstant chargo was that fllowing jahangics fulimg healh, all efecive power had shipped info the hands of not jahan begurs charge which i g gult 0 acept since stah jahaus fuhera v, at kban, was the imperial diwar, and though in poor health, jahangie was mentalyalest and 70 deciions conld be faken wihout his concurrence.
jahangivs llescrcated he urther dange tht an ame bilows noble might txy 10 use the situation to ather supreme power in s haods, an unexpeted cpsods brought this o the fore.
mababat khan who bad played a leading.
ol in dealng with shab jabaes rbelon, had been fesling drigrunled because cectain clements st the court wereeager 0 el his vings fllowing he end of the princes re bellon.
it was et that bis alnce with prinee parvez night be dungerous.
summon ed o thecour to rendsr accouns, maabat khea came with 5 trusted body of rajputs and sized the eriperor at anapproprste moment when the rosal camp was crossng.
the rver jhelum on s way to kabal, nar jabas, who bad oot been spprebended, scaped acron theriver, ot 4n aseul made vda i 7 first ralf of the seyenieinth contury in conjuscton with asf kban faed igno misiouly.
n jahan now tred other ways sh surrndered hersef to mahabat kbas i1 order to be close o jakangi, and wied 1o ll the supicions of mahabat kuan while sectly tryiog herbest 1o sndermine s position.
witkinsix months, aking adveniage o the misakes comaniied by malabat khan, who was 3 soldier but not  dplomat or 41 administator, and dve 0 the growing unpopu ity of is rajput soldiers, nur jahan was able to wean away most of the nobles from mababat kians side.
realumg his pre carious.
posiuon, mahabat kban sbandoned subangic and fid fom the court.
some tme ater, hejoincd shah jaban who was bme the defs of mabsbat khan was the greten victory stained by nor jahan snd was dse, in 0 small measue, 0 her cool coursge and mpncity.
however, nor jabans tiemph was shortlved, for in jess than o years time, jabangi brethed nis jat, 00 ar trom labore 1627, the wiy and shisw asaf khan who bad been appoieted wakil by jabanpr, and who had beea careuly preparing the ground for th succeson of i sonn v, shab jaban, now came inio the open.
supported by the diwan, the chet nobles and the army, he made nur jahan a virtsal prisoner 4nd sat a8 rgent surmons 0 stah jaban in the deccan.
mesnwhile, he put 4 sonof khusrau on the vacamt throne 56 3 puppet, shah jahans younser brother, parvz, bad alceady ded doe o excesve driking.
hin sccond brother, shahny made s fesie ffort for the throne, but he was casly defated and thrown ntoprson afer havng been blinded.
soon.
aftrwards, habh jaban rached agra and was enhroned amids gea.
ceoiiog eaclier, a s nsance, by rval scluding his imprisoned brocher, m cousias, i, were done o death.
this pic cedeat 0 the cher pecedent of 3 108 rbet.
ling agains s fthe, vhich was bogn by jahengir snd was ollowed by shah jabes, gynasty.
shah jahan bl was o reap the bt fots be had sowe.
s for nor jahan, afier atiiming the throms, shah jhan e o selement upon.
ber.
she fived s reured e oll ber deah 18 years stal jahess reign 1626.59 was fllof manyided sciniy.
we heve aleedy studied his deccan poley.
we shall now turn 1o the foregn poey of the mughals wheh resched  igh watemark vader stah jaban, foreign paicy o the mughals we have seen how folownng the breskvp of the trmarid cmpie n e sacond half ofthe icenthcentury, three powerll empicesthe usbek, the safavd and the ottosancstabls.
e emscivesin tranoxiana central as, tran and turkey.
the usbeks were the te.
1l saemicsof the mghals, havag seen re.
spossibic o the expulion of babur snd.
the otber timaridprinces from samarqand aod theadjinng ncluding korasan.
he rmg power of the saavids who.
clamed kborasan.
the khorasamian plateas linked iran with cenira asia, and.the trade oues to chinaand india pased across it it vas mtanl for the sufavds and the mughals 1o gy sgaint the usbek danger especally as thre were o fonter dspotes between the wi the excepton of qunchar, the usbeks e rutbenly persecutcd the suneis.
both, the usbek and the mughalralers, were st but the mughals were oo broaminded m 05 swayed by sectanaa dffereces.
anacy ot the aance of he meghals vih  e usbeks ccsasionlly perhaps the mostpowerfl mpi in west ada a1 the time was gat of the oftoman turks.
the ottoma or the usmast toeks, socalld afe the same of their frst ok, usman 41526, bad overren asia minor 304 caser burope, 4ad.
it conquered sy, nd egrpt aad arbu by 1599, they bad reived the il sutan of run from the hadowy calih isg st coieo.
lutr, hey s sanmed he ke o padshalisom the rue of a shile power n inn made b ottomen sutas consious of the danger 10 thei e, that  would.
encoursge shism o their own terrores.
1a 1512, the turkish sl dfeated the sha of i i 8 fumous batle.
they clushed with t for the contrl of baghdad and o for the res i aorth tan, around edfia.
they gadually cxtended thee control on the contl aeas sround acsba and mades b to ous the porugeee fom the perins gul and the iadins vaten.
the otoman trest from the west made e pecuans ocn  befnend the moghals purticalary when they had t0 e aggresive dabek power i the as.
the maghls refused tobe drawn o wripara ottoman, mughal ut allnce gt the persians 4 1 would e et the acen bl of power s0d et em on o fce the mght of the uk allace it taa wes s heiphl i promot g trad with ctal a 1 he mghals  stronger smvy, they migh.
perbaps, have sought o alissos with turkey which was o ssaval power snd vasesgages i s  at e v of the esropesa povers al dot i the mederranen.
as it wa, the moghols were acy of a clower rlatiooship with turkey snce they were 2ot pcparedto counteaance the claim 0 saperionty made by the turkish sulta as socesor 10 the caliph.
these were someof the fuctors which shaped.
the foreiga polcyof the moghals.
akbar ad e usheks ta 151, folloingthe defet of he ushek che, shabin khar, by the safuids, babe bad briey reguned samarqand.
alhongh babur had 1o leave the ciy e the usbeks had eficted 3 sharp dfet o the pesias, the el exteded 10 i by the persian monareh etabished s traiion of riendship between the moghals 1ad the satwuds.
latr, humayus, to0, reeed blp from the safuvid menarch, st tahmasp,when be had sough reuge st s court after being oused from tnda by shor shah.
the tertorial power of the usbeks grow rapidly i the seventies under abdallah khan usbek in 157273, abdaliah kbao usbek sized balkn which, along with badakshen, badserved 23 3 kind of boffr between the mughale s0d the usbeka.
tn 1577, abdullah kb e 2n embassy to aksar, propoung 1o partion iran.
aflr the deatn of shab tuhaasp 1576, ra was pussog through 3 phase of anarchy 20 dsorder.
abdulh usbek urged that albar should lead an expedition from inda o tran iaorder that they may with wnited efors wlewe irag, khorasan and fars from the imsovators shis.
akbue was sot moved by this sppesl tosecarian narrowness.
a strosg jan was eventia o kiep the fouless usbels in ther plce.
at the same tm, akbar bad 0 desre ot embeoied with the usbeks, uss they dwesly trestod kabul o th iadias posses sione.
this vas the key o axbarsforega oa i t is e of t seventernth crntuby policy.
abdslah usbek sl spprosched the ouomsn sulan ssdpeopossd a tnprtte allasce of sunni powens aguins lan.
asif i eply o tis, akbar sea  returs embas 0 abdlih usbek in whieh it was ponted out that derencer in iaw and relgon could ot beregarded 1 suffcent ground for conguest.
reparding dficuies fced by plgnas to mesca, he pounied out that with te congut of gujart, new route bad been opened.
he cophasied the od frendship wih jrus and amonihed abdullah kban usbek for making g refeences o the safvids and sud ey were iy and soercigas akbars growing interest in cestral aian s wa reflcted in s g efoge  s court o the timund prne, mirza susimao, who had becn ousted from badakishan by s andion.
abal fual says that the kiyber pos vas made 5. for whesled rafic,and that e 0 e of the moghal,the gates of bulkh e usaly keptclosed.
t oder to forsall o nvasion of badakhshao, abdulah usbek focened troube among the ibeszen of the norhvest frouie through b agent, jaala, who v 3 rlpous et the shuaon became o serious that akbar had o move to attock t was during thes operations that akbar ot coe of s best frends, raj b, tn 1555, abdullah usbek soddenly con quered badakhsban.
both mirza sulsiman 50 his grandson sought relugs t akbars court and were givea suable mansats.
mean il wih the deah of i halfbroter, mrza fakim 1585, akbar amnexed kabul 1o b doainions.
thus, the mugha and ths usbek trontersra side by nde.
absulluh khan usiek sow st ssoter embassy which akbar receved whilehe vas attock on th rivr indus.
arbars cootied presence t0sear the frotiec had made abdullh uzbek vy, bat the real motive  of abdullsh usbeks embasy, it sppears, was o obtain akbars pestaly fn b projted campagn n khorasan apiost the saaids.
ho, therefore, revved the caler proposi for a joist cumpuign aguastthe  salaid porwer, and for apenin the way fe il to mo, meanwhile aking advantage of th situa ton, the otiomaa sulan bad favaded norther ira, il the usbeks wee heate g herat in khorastn, akbar sent along et n epy to abdullah usheks proposa.
he dippeoved the.
turksh sction, 1ad propesed 1o desatch s army fo iran under e ofth royal prioees o bep.
this vas 3 thaly veled theeat of mtervention to abdulsh usbek, akhough he was asked o cooperateia the ork and hope vas expresed of thes mcedag s rus.
however, akar made no serious prparatons to back up i thrat ofa acoaign n .
alo, abdulah usbek had imvaded norseeeven fore abirs it resched bim 1 captored most o the reasbe clamed.
ta s stuaton,  appeired bst to akbar g come to tems wihthe usbek chil hesce, oo of b ageas, hakim hunsn vas sentto abdullh khua usbek wih ea and 4 verbal mesage.
it seems that 0 agrerest was madedetomgthe hindekush  the bouadary betwen the two.
it impled the mughal vingup ther inveres i badakhuhan and balkh whih bad been rled by timud prises ul 1255, but it alto impbed the usbeks ootchining kabol aad quadiar thogh vetcr party gave wp s clims congieeh, b agresment gave the moghles defcasle fronte on the hindukush.
akber completed hisobecuve of esablshing 4 ien e defasibl fronter by sequnng.
qundiar in 1995, 1o addion to tis, rom 159 akbar saged st lakor i oxder to watch the st on.
he.ieft for agrs oy afe th desth of abdullsh kan ushek 1n 158, after the death of abdalla, he uzbeks broks up into waringprincpaliics, and cased o b thrat 10 the mughals for  onsiderabe e, the quesionof quedhar sod relaion with lrnn the dread of usbek poer was he most poten ator which beought the safewds and the moghal togeter, despte the ushek aiemp 10 rase.
snilshin.
s mests upunst iranand e maghal didke of the mtolerant polces adopeed by the safivid rues.
tho aly trosble st between the tvo was qasdhar he powenion of which vas cumed by both on steglo and cconome grounds, a5 well a3 o comiderations of seviment and presige.
qundhar had besa 3 pat of the tiserid empire and bad been ruied over by babur cowis, e mlers of herat, gl they were usied by the usbeka ia 1307, babur held quadar breky in 150, bt when e safvvds defcated the usbek chier, shaani khar, and captued herat and the recof khorasan, hey lid clim 10 qundbar sl for the sexl docadeand  af, however, quadha remined.
o the hands of semiindependent goversors who endere thnr llganc t the mughah o o the sauvis s  uted thes comenienc.
stateically, quadiar was vi for the defence of kabol.
the fort of quodhar was comidered to.be one of the rongest forts in e region,  was well provided wt vaer, stuated at the juacion of roads lending o kabul and herst, qundhar dommated the whole souther afghansian, and ocupied 3 pouiionof immense strsegl importance.
a moders write has obseved, the.
kabul ghazs qundhar e reprseed o sniegic 104 logial fromier beyosd kabul snd al du khaiar, thre was z0 maural e of defoce, morcove, the pomesuon of quadhar made it eaer o comrol the afghan and baluch s afee th conquest of sindh and blechistan by akbar, the stategic andeonomicimpor anee of qundhar fo the mughas ncreased.
qundhar was a rch and fetle provioce axd was the hab of the movement of men snd o0 between tndia and central ass.
the e trom central ava 10 multan via qun dhar, and thence dow the river tndus t0 the e teadiy gased m importancs, becavie the roass seross tran were freguendly disturbed due to wars sod iternl commotions.
akbat wavted 1o promote trade on this roste, and poiated out 1o abdulah usbek tht  was an shtersate rovte for pilftims and the goods sl to mecca.
takomg il these facors i sccount, would appear that qundbar was dot 43 important 1o the persins a5 0 the mugiabs.
for lian, qundhar was more of an ouipos, an imporiant one no doubs,ruher o v basion n defece st in the carly phase, howeve, the dipute over quadhar was ot allowed 16 afeck good relaions between the two countces, qundhar came.under baburs contel in 1522 when the usheks wece threatenng khorasan once again.
no seriousobyeciono.
the mughal congoest of qundhar was raed by he persians in view of tis siation.
however, when homayua sought sheter at the court of stah tahmasp, the tranan monarch agreed 0 elp hi pro vided he tansered qundbar to tran after ity conquest from his ralfbrother, kamian.
humayon had file choice but 1 gres.
but after s conguest humaysn found excuses 0 kecp it under n control.
in fct, quodbar was hia base o opeations gt kamran in kabal, stah tahmasp captured quodhar aking dt i 17 st aly of t sentrbth centory adrantage of e confsion folowing huma juns desth.
akbar made no olort o egun it ke usbeks under abdsllh usbek poed reseved theat 10 tan ad 1o the the mughl coaques of qandbar 1395 was 7ol 8 purt ol an agrsement between.
abbar 0 th usbeks to paration the persian empite 6 some modera horias have wrgusd.
16 et more to caableh  viable cenave lne o the morhvet sgaist 8 possble uzhek imvsion, e horasma had pusedvnder usbek contro by that e, 300 quodnar wis cutof from persa.
reans between tz avd e mughals continuedto be cordil, despit e mughal conquet of qundhar.
afer akbas deat, the perians made.
an sborune aiempt o quedhar.
but shak abbas 1 ruled 13881629, who was perkaps the greaies of the safewd ruers, was jean o ke 00d.
roaioss wik jahangir.
he repodated the atack on qundhar, nd tere was a gl cachange of eniusis and cosly g, mcluiog rarioe, between the o, shah abbas alo esblubed close dipomte and commersel relaions with e ducean st bt ths was ot ovjeced to by jahasgie, nouber side f threacencd,and hers is a0 imagrnry porirakt by  court ariat showug jihangi and stah abvas embrcng exh other, wih  lobe of he world beneath i s caturally, 1, the two couniies cume even closer 1o each other duing the et nur jaia, whost fer had come from perua, phyed 4 role in s bt the slance proved 1o be more uieul o shah abbas han 1o jahangu, fo e kst 0 et culuvstog endibp wih the uzhek chef, 15 he fell secure i the friendsp of s brother, shah absas,in 1620, shah aboas s polte request for the restoation.
of qundhar, and made preparations for ttacking o tabange was taken b surpise, fr be was iplommticaty ioated and milacy upeepar i for 8. hasy prepurations for th rkaf of qundhar were underaken, butprnce shah jahan put torward.
irpossiie demands before e would march.
ass ese, quadher posed 0l the baads ofthe penians 1623, alhough shah abbas tied 0 case the biereascer the s f quodiar by seadng lavish embusy 1o juhasgir, and offered sl exlunstions whih were scupd by t frraly,the cordin.
iy which had marked e moghal raions i ean came 32 ad, 2nd aeraofdiplo it preparations xwed bt irsn s began farsaching changss had ukza plce contal a polics afertho dat of ab.
dulahs khn usbekc 1695, the uk empis had disintegrated due o miesecioe il fuds, and persa had taken advaning o ho scustion o resover kioraan, bt sufesd 3 defst aear bk when i iodto advnce fothet, the ushek power was sl consdersb, wsd oo be taled wit, afe some e, e, quit et s the mdspendest  et of bokdura aad bilkh.
although the usbeks et a0 toage i  posiion o0 challeage sha abbiafor the control of kiorase, they were ot avers 10 making mucauding rih it afhaontan s on kabul, tho porian captase of quachar made.
tho usheks snaasy.
sty after tha capire of qandhar, shab abkas tured tovards the wet 424 ecptured baghdad from e turks, hence, the excr idea of an allane ofthe thies s povers the usbet, the mughals 2ad the otomani agains l was covivd and 8 sciesof e s et cxohanged becoes jabangic and he usbeks or g an sccord.
thee ffrs continued soder shah jihan afer e desth of iuhangie.
1 1627, the usbek londe,lmam qi raadiloguenly hanked jibangs for ho hep sivea by akbarto abdula khwn usbek i khorastn.
bt for fcar of shah abbas, b bad w sl kept the perin rue inormed of he moghal integues spunst p, thee vere sl secis of ushk atacks o katal, bt et and fe he sscession of shah jahan.
towas, thus, spparent thasthe uzbeks could nok be coumied spon for sy help giost persa.
the ottomans were 00 far s tobe elfctive.
moroover, they fook  upeior atiude which was solsccopable o the moghils, heoce, shab jaban ook recoure o dplomacy.
at the death of stab abbas 1629, there were dustrbusces inlran.
tukog adwntage of i, and.
atier bein e of deccas affs, sk jham adoc al marden khan, the pesan.
goversor of qundhar, 10 et to the side of the meghals 1658 shab jabaus balkh campaign but ke conquest of qundhar was only the mesnt to anead, shah jehan was morccon cemed with the seious danger of recurent ushek stacks oa kabel, and ths ntigies with the balch 4ad.
afghan tnbes.
at the gme, both bokhura asd balkh had come.
nderthe conrolof nazs mubaramad, yousger broher of lmam qul.
nuzr mubammad sd i son, abdal az, e ambtons and had latngoed wik afghan mbeimen for gang contrl of kabul and gbaza.
howerr,soon abdul asiz headod 5 rbelion agunit his thr, and aly bulkh remiined snder the contolof naze muhasmed who sppssed o shab jahaa for hep.
sesurefom the id of e porsans, shah jahao.
accpied the appe it sacty he moved from lahore t kabul, 24 depted arg amy e price morad.
o hlp nazx mubammad.
the army whih conssed o 50,000 horse and 10000 footmen ocluding maskees, reckioes 1n8 gonser straced prisce murad o trat naze mbammad ith great comidertion an o retore balkh to i if he bohaved wih modesty 20 submis won.
furtec, f noze muhammad expeenod 3 deste o regain.
sumarqend and boklara, the prince was todoeverything 1o bhelp him.
obvioualy, shah jahea wanied a foendly eoer st bokhard who looked o the mughals for help aod support.
bt morads smpetsosity ruined the plan, he marched oo balkh withot waiting for mstrvoions from nt muhass mad, ordered his men 9 e the fot o balkh a which naze maharmad vas.
esding, aad curlly asked him o vait on b peronaly.
uneertin of thepriaces inteaions, nezr mubarmad .
the mughals wero foroed to ocoupy balkh, aad bold it p the facoofu sulleaind bostie populaion, nor was aa lerastive to ness mobammad casly avil able.
abdal azz, son of naar miubammad, rused the uzbek trbes agaiet e mughals in traasoxuns, and mustesd 3 srmy of 120000 sea sccos the siver oxus meas while,prioes marad, who had beea paing for home, was replaced by prince auriagisb, the mughals made 10 efort 1o defead the omos, e 16 vas canly ocdsble, lonend, they place pickets at srategic plces, and kpe the main foree togetber 10 that i coud marsh esily to aay threateoed point.
the mughals were wll posioned.
abdol atz cromed the oxes, but s0on found himself facs to facowith  tasgo maghal army.
i  rnmiag.bule, the maghals routed the usheks outside the gaies of balkh 1647, toe vilory ofthe mughals st balls paved the way for negotistons with the uzbeks, the usbek supporters of abdel azz melied away and ho now made overtures 1o the mughals, nzt mabamoad who bad sken sefugein pecsin also approsched the mughals forthe restoration of his empire.
afer care indaa i t frst salf 07 t seventeenth chntury  consderabon, shah jahaa decidedin favour of neat mubamuad but nazv mubamead was fist ssked 0 make an apo logy 10d humble subisson o proce aursngizh, this was 5 misaks sace the proad ushek ruler was ualkely 1o demean himself 2 this way, partcalarly when he knew thac i was mpossble for the mughals 10 bold o t0 balkh for say length of time, after wating aily for naze muhammad 1 sppear personaly,the moghals ef balich in october 1647 tisce witer was fast approsching and there were o suppies in balkh.
the rcrst nesly tured nto  rout with hoste bands of usbeks hoverng aroundthoughthe mghtls sufesd grievous losss, the fimoess of aurangae preveated 3 st the bakh campuign of shah jakan hss loa 1o consderabe controvrsy among moden histoniess.
from the foregoing acsoun, 1t should b clear that shah jahan was not atemping 0 fxthe mughal fronter oa the localled scieatife ine, the ama darya e v nor was shal jaban mouvated by th dsir 0 conger sumrquad und farghane, the mughal home.
lands, thovgh the maghal emperors fre aeally wed about it shab jahans objectve 1t seems, was to secure fricadly e ia tulkh and badaklsban, thesreus which bordered kabul, aad which had been rued ove by timurid prines il 1s5, th, be believd, would sso elp i coneoliag e dimfecton of the afghaa trbes tving around ghazm and in the kiyber pass.
thecam puign was e the milary sensethe maghul conquered balkh, un defesed uzbek atempt 10 oust them.
ths was the first siguficast vitory of tndan sims inthe regon, and shah jahan b reson 1o ceebrte .
however, it was beyond th srsagt of the maghals to maitain tei influescs at blth forany length of tme.poitically o, it was ifical o do o 10 the e of sullen persisn hostlty 43d an unfiendy local popuntion.
allm all, while the balth campuign rised the prosuge of mughal amms for s tme, it uioed them e poiual advantage.
peshaps, h would bave becn more advantageous 10 the mughals, and would have saved onsiderabe expenditie ofmen and mosey, f shah jaban had iy adiered o e kabulghazai qundhar e so iibariouly etablsted by aklbar.
aayhow, nezr mubarmmad remained riendly t0 the maghal s long s he vas alve and there vas  gonsant exchaags of saveys beoween e twa.
moghalpersian reltionshe last phase the setbock m bulkh led o8 el of usbek hostity i the kabel regon 4nd afghn il unest 1 the khyberghazel ares d mboidened th porsians o tsck and conguer quadbar 1649. ths s a b blow 10 s jahess prde and be jauschedthree msor campuigor, one by o, unde prnces of bload oty and recover qundhar.
te fos atack e ke by aursagaeh, the hero of bk, witk an army of 50000, though the magials deteted the pesans ovtide the for, they could not congeer it the fce of dtermaned peruan opposion.
aecoad stemp led by aurangash three yosrs oer s fuled.
the ot grandiogueat lort was mads e folowisg year 163 under dar, the fvourte son of shah jaban.
darabad made many bostful ceis, bathe wisunible to starve the fort sato surender with the bep of s ege amy, and .
atempt stcapurng st wik the bep of o of the bigget guas i the empre which bad bota towd to qundiar was lo of o avil.
the faluse of the moghals 3 quadiar did ot o msch et e weaknes of mghal arillery, 30 s been usertod by some histo faos, i cuber showed the iahrentszcogh of qundiar fort i beld by 2 dtormaed com mander, and tho inellectivenes of wedl ey sgunat srong fors.
this was als0 he maghat experienc n the decean it may, oweer, be.
srgued hat shh jabass atch et 6 quadbar vas o sntimenta than relsts.
wi the groving enfesbiment of oth the usbeks and the safavds, quadhar no onge fad the sum stmategc mportines a5  had carir, 1 wae not 10 much he o of quadhia 1 he e of the sepented mugh eforts which siscod the mughal presige.
but ven s shoukd ot b unduly exaggerated for the mughalempirs remained ostvardly a1 tho hoght of s power and prosige ducing auraogass regn.
even.the roud ottoman i s 4n ety to a in 1680 1o sk hissupporc.
aursngash docded not 1o continuethe g conest over quadhar, and quly reneed diplomati eatons wih tras how e, in 1668, shah abbas 1, the rier o lxn, nvsted he moghul envor, made.
dipuraging romars againt autsngach, and sven hresen o an immion.
the onues of hs are ot clar, 0 socms that shah abbas i was ofan umstable churscter.
thare was afurry of maghil sctvy i the punid and kabol.
bat before aay souon could iake place, shah abbas i ded.
s sscemsos were son.
cotis, and il persan.
danger 0 the indian frosier dimppenred gl  new ruke, nadic sk, came o power more fan.
g8y years toer, tewil s be seen that on the whole, the mughal mcceeded in maitaving  sorenifo frosie in the northowst, based o the flindukish, o3 the one sde, and the kabol gl on the oher, with quadharas ta outer vaston.
thus, their bade foregn poliy was basedon thedefece of india.
the ctesce oftis fontirlne was fcthe buctes sed by diplomatic weans.
frieadship with peia was its keynote, despie temporary setbcks ove tbe question of qundar.
the oftprocamed dasce of recovering the mughal homdands was realy wsed 25 3 diplomatic ploy, for was seve seriosly pursed.
these milary aod diplomatic mesas adopted by the mughal wers remarably sucocsul in giving indis sevcty from foreign mvssons for  o tme scondty,the mughals mssed on elations of equaty with leading, asian nations of the e, both with he safavid, who chimed  specal positon by vitue of el relatonship with the prophet, and wilh the otioman eulens who had aeumed th it of padshabi sl 414 clmed to e the successors of the chliph of baghead, tuidly, the moghal wsed theeforeign polcy o promots ndias commercial inorese, kabal and qundhar were the lwan gteways of indi rade with cenral asi.
tho economic mporanee of s tads for he maghal empire s et 10 o fully assssod.
growth of adoinstraton  mamsabdari systems and tho maghal army the adninisrative machinery and revosse sysem developed.
by akbar were maiatainnd under jahangie s0d shah jahas with minor modicaions.
importantchanges wers, how.
v, elfcted i the functioning of the mansab dart sysem.
t mansabdari syatom, s it deveoped unde the mughals, was o distictive aad unigue sysem which did not bave say exactparalel owtside tndia.
the who orgasised bis army o decimal bai, the lowest sait of com vda 1 tr prst bale of 1 sevrteentr crvtory s mand g fe, 224 the highest e thowsand uoman whore ccmmandar was calod khan the moagol system nfioenced, 1o som cxent, e millary syem of the dol sokant, for e s of commanders of ndred and one toussads sdis s0d hezaras.
but ve do ot it kaow the system which was prevlnt nder babur d homayen, thero 13 good deal of contovesy a5 10 whenths mansabiar sysem was stacte, from e avalable evidence, 1 seems 0 have een iniated by akbar i the 19k e of s gn 1577, he same time hat v elomed.
e revue sysem and nroduced.
whst are el a1 and sovar.
akbovgh many hitocs areof e pison that thesawarra was ntro dod it by akbar,reset tudies show that both e ranks weremicodoced at the same .
tho st rnk signied te personal status of individaal in theimperil hirarhy, and sho faed o salary.
there were sityi gades or menabs from ten fo.
ten howsand.
b aaks sbove five thasiand vere essrved for prnces.persons hlding t blow 00 24t el mansabdrs, thos from so0 and below 2500 amir, 40 those holdin raas of 2500 and shove e calld amivumda or amirbazam.
howeve, the word mansabir i sometimes wiedfor 4l e thre ctsgorie.
apact from status, hs cssfiaion bad  sgaiance  a0 amir o an amirbumds co0d have snctbr am o mansabdar teve e his, but 50  maiabdor.
thas,  person ith 3 aak of 5000 could have woder him  t t s 1 b and oman sty g e e o o et aabr o s o o e o s, tha mol o ead o 4 e et  e o dons v ok ee 4 et s ncloed o, ks, l mansabder up o 8 rank of so zat and ose with ras of 4060 could have  mensabds wp 0  rak of 40t and 10 00, the cntgaris wars a0t rpd.
fersors were geoe.
rally appoared st low s 324 padually proaoted,dopeading vpo thefs merts and the favoue of the cmpeoc.
a person coud.
s be desole as 4 mark of punishment thas, there was only one semice  incudng bt armymen ond clas.
people enered service  lowest g f th e, and souk hope 0 o 0 th postion of anamirox v ame.
fumda, to that exiea, caees vers heowa open o e in addton to mesing his pessoml exes s, the mansabdar ha to mainam ont of k iy  spuiaid quots of hors, dephares, beastsof burden camels and  and cars.
thus o manobda hoding  7a ke of 000 i to mantai 340 horss, 100 dephasts, 400 carmels, 100 e and 160 artl late, these wersmaotained cnially, bat the maniabdr nad to pay for them outof i salary.
tha orses were claifed ko i catogori, 434 the dephant o v ackoding 1o qulty, e auaber s0d quilly of hoses 4nd skphanis berg caeuly prscibed this was 50 becacse honer 124 sphast of high bresd were srstly prsed and vers considered ndispes.
bl for an effient miliary machioe.
coaley nd cephants, i fct, formed th main busis fthe army i thase days, hough.the ey was rapidly bucoming moe importat.
the eusaport corps o il fo making.
th army mors mobie.
for mosting e expeces, the moghal manabdars wewe pud handsouely.
a mar smbdar vith  ankof 5000 coud g 3 salary o ra.
30,00 per month,  maniabdarof 300, ke 7,00, 104 of 1000, s 8300 per momih.
bven bl sadh ol 4 ank 100, could gt re.
7000 poc year.
rosgly  quiner of thes e were et on meetag the cotof e tasspor corps.
even fhn,  he maghelmarsobdars formed the highs puid s i he e the v rank indicaied h e of eovleynen s mansabar was cpested 0 i o a e svemge e f rs.
240 per anmim o s 0 begn wi, later, 1 ghe i of sehange  s e to rs, 300 pessnme.
tndivide s were pud according o therr sonatys mughl o mor than 0 tndian of it wed o rein s of the ol salary bill of the savars i e o et variou contigent sxpease, in siiion, he go an mcrense of wo.
rupess i b  sty o every sower e ralntaine, thi was to compentate i fo his elarts sad e arge responuibily it impied.
e s of the st psen may b ek 50, 5 e with one horse oaly a comidred s imsaver, i hlf 3 sewar had coe ieg on the.
ground  scondty, the mughals fvoured mized coni pn, wih men drava s fasd proportions from o snd tursn, mughat, indan rajpes.
ek the spi of seibl or eibale exciusivenes.
how cver i special citcumstances,  mughal or rajput mansobdr was allowed o have  con tingent drawn exclusively from mughals o rapurs, towssde the end of akbars regn, ge ghet raak 8 sobie ouid aian wat rised from 5000 o 7000, iz two e nobles of he cmpire, mirza asnt koka sad raja man sigh, e hosoures it the ank of 1000 exch this it was maintancd ol the end of rursogaehs g, a number of cther modi eation vere, howeve,carmed vt during the poricd.
there waa a tendency o reduce ak jlares the sverag slary paid to 3 sawar s adacad by jakangy, 34wt have o01d ahove tahasgie also ntrodiced 5 system whercby lected nobles could be llowed o mantain larger gt of tzoopers, witiou raisiog thele ac tk thie v the deaspah sikaspah sy ealy, twooper wih 2 ot 3 horss whek mphad hat s pamabdar oldmg e fank had tc mamtain and was paid fordouble e uota of troopers mdcated by hs sawar rank thos, o mansabdar olding  22t ank 3000, 320 3000 sawars deaspah sikaspah would b requied o maisai 00 trvopers.
normally, 0 mansabdar vas given 4 sawas runk which was igher than hs st rank.
a furtber modifcstion, whch comes 0 out bouce dering shah jahawsrign, was simede s eratgaly edscong he mamber of suwars  ok wasrequired to maincain thus, noble s expeced to mamta a quota of oy one hrd o s sawarrank, and n some cvcums.
atces opefourth o even ooeth.
thenoble of jakangies eiga who had the raok of 3000 204, 3000 sewar, would mainsin 80t more than 1000 trocpers but this would  doubld, ., be would marmtain 2000 troopers, 1t s rank was 000 cowar daspah sibatpa.
although the slaries of the masabiars a x t pr aly o i vbtn century wer sted i rupee,they were goserlly st poid in cash, but by assigning them g, the wocking o the japidar yctem under akbar bas been.
arcady dicosed.
maniah dor pretersd  i et cash paymeats e iy to b deayed snd sometimes e e of busines, the moghals buseaveraieed the sobily.
batthey couldaot ke awey thlr feudal tachment to land.
clclated at the rateof 40 dams 10  upee thie document wa culed the foma dom of ssesed izcome bsed on dams.
as the numbe of masabirs koot groming vevn the above modifcations were not found adequae draste cuts i wiares al found would have created dinsicion.
among the nobles whi the rules could ond heoce, he guot of troopers a4 horses scble bud o muinaiaout of n sewar mak wis furtherreduced by s new scalig device, the wlaies of the mansabdars e pt ca a menth sale10 mondis,  morihs, 6 month o even les then thatind ther ohigstcns for he maitenaoce of quotn of sawars wese browght down scordisgly.
thus, o mansabdar who had rak of 3000 za, 000 swar snd main tained 1000 s wnder the rle ofonehird sbove, would normally have bad maisain 2200 orses under th rule o but i he wan paton 8 10 sitin oaly 1800 oaly 1100 horse.
it 200, har.
mas e for any one 1 ge llowasce for e than s ot o fr more han 10 moothe the monthcale bad lile 1o do with decae m the moome of the agir.
during sha juhuas reign, the jamadam, it i, e vl of the jag, nceased, but the isrease kcptpace broadly s the pie ie drin e period.
alto, the monhsale nas sppled 208 oly 0 i, butlso 1 trose w were puid i caib it may e notd it mow o e marthas who were induced ato he mughal sevice, were suigoet maats on 3 s monihly bass o even s in s ay, e they were given s hogh ek inth b archy, the sctal number of horse asd elecive savars was much et b va ndi cuted by theic rank.
toe swailabily of e have seon, vit for effcieat cavaly fore.
the drasos reduction of remowis curing shab jahans reiga s, therfore, have adversly alced the effiacy of the moghl cavary 103 whle, the mansabdon sy of the moghas vas 2 complex sysem.
t it fctoning depended o number of fuctors, inludiog e peoper funcomog of e dogh braio syt ofthe japedart ke 1 b daph sysen worked badl, the state would be chested.
i the jamdami was itiied, or the jgidac was o sbe 0 ge the salery doe o him, he wouk be difcted or e wold ot maintain his due ontisgent.
on balaace the mansabdari sytem worked propely undr shah tuhan, on aicount of n metlons atteion 1 sdminisrton and men ciuding the sppoisiment of mighly competnt pertons a5 i careul aintion tothe choce of a prtons fo the servie, vt dcplne a1 defite syem of promoton and rewads made the mughal nobiy s lovl and, on the whole, kighly depcadable body whih was able o marge the due  raton 104 to defend and expand the e e mughal army the cavalry, 8w have soed, wab the principal st of the moghal army and the moniabiart provided the.overshelming pro.
porion o it inadtition o the nansabdars fhe maghil emperons wed 1o entriain indvidusl troopers, caledahadis.
the ahadis have baen calldpeiomenrcop.
ors and recevedmach mg salais than ber troopers.
they were a highly trsted corp, being ecesied aty by the.
e peroy sad aving there own muster masier, ko ahad musiered p 1o v rorss, though jomeines two of them shareda hone.
the e of ahods wee of misclancows charac e mot clers of he impecial ofies,the pin 1 of thacout,the foremen i the royal karke in sdditicn o the akads, the empecors maintainsd corp of roral bodygused vola shhls and e palice guass.
they were altymen but srved on foot in the ciadel i hepace.
the footmen piadgen formed 8 nume rous bt micllncous sody.
masy of them icluded porers, servans, newsunaers, rvordamen, wieslers 4ndslaves.
the sevs, gough 1t 35 sumerovs 51 during the st e, empeor or by a prie.
somtines  slave could bcome o geatemaarooper.
but pener 1y foocsoldie had low taus the moghal emperors had a lage stable of war clephanes, and also 8 welorgnised pack of anery.
the arlley consivted of two.
sectonsheary guns which weee usedfor eftdiag ox ssalin fots thee were ofen lumsy and iflalt 0 move the second was he bt arilery which vas bighly mobie i srllry tnd, ot s, many ottomaas snd portuguese were employed 1n the depariment.
by 3o time of aurengaeh, mughal aillry had improved consderably, a4 foreignes found employment in.
the arllery depariment with ey, the big s were somemes extsvaganty aree in sz, bt 55 3 modera wree s, thesehuge gues made mre o than they i arm they could not be fied many tmes in  day, and were very liale o burs and destoy the mea in charge howerer, the fremhinan berwer, who accompanied shah juban to lahore and kashesi, found the it cilery, caled arilery of thesierup, fo te xtrmely wel appoued.
e says 1t consistd of b0y sral gid ieces, allof bras ach plece mouated o0  wellmade sad nandiomely pusted.
carting, contaning two ammnition boses, 4ad drava by o e horses, with a third hors n reerv.
ari.
iy or swivebguns were sl mossted on clephants and camels.
t is ek o estimate the stength of the mughal army.
1 conssted, under shah jahan, of sbout 200,00 cavaly, exchding the men workig n the dtrics and withfauiders.
it ros 1o u000 under aueangieh.
the infasty undec shab jahas excding the .
fghting o, are plased 5 40,000 4ad may.
inoua in t first aly of thr seventrenth contury have been maiatained at a simiar fgwre oder avrngeb hon et v e moghlumy compared 1o the neighbouriog wewt an central asien states a0 the buropean states of thetine 1t is dfiult to ssswe this ques tion, though 3 number of buropean travlers, such a5 benir, have made advene remarks about the ficiency of the mughal army.
a carfil snalysi shows that his remarks were ey direcedtovards the mughal nfentry, which had no el o disciphne, was mrorpansed snd illded, and reembled  fabbe.
the devlopment of the miaatey had taken  diffrent road io europe, witk the development of the fiatgun, th nfeatry became a formidablefightiog force darin the sevntcenth ceatury, 20 coukd vea outclss the cavly, a5 the tndian powers were 10 reale 1o their oost during the cightmath gentory.
the sucees of the maghal aguest the urbeks who could.
match hemseves wil the perans st the time of the balkh cam paigns suggests tht the mioghal army was sot far ferir to the central asisn s0d persan armes n a1 open contestts major weakaess was i e naval sphere, parteularly in the aeld of secvarfre.
though somewhat de clest 1 th fld ofatlery, it bad spparetly ght up with the asian powersthough not with the europeaa seagong powers, by the tme of auangzeh, bt the srmy as  whole, partculary the cavaly, was closly liked with the jagirdar ysem whick 1 tun, was based on the feudel system o and reaons prevwlent mthe country.
in the utimste fesor, the steaglh and eficecy of oae depended on the othr, exbrcises 1. disess the contibasion of jahangie nd shah tahas o the expaasion of the mughal capire 2. dexribe the reations between the moghal and the usbeks in the sxtesath century.
3. how did the qustionof qasdhar afect the reltions between the mogal  aad iran descrbe thes rltions p o the regn of auraageb.
4. what werethe main aims o the mughal policy in cesiral asi .
dosribe the organization of the mansabdari sytem.
meation the changss which took place n the maabdar ysem after akbar 6. what were the main armsof the maghal army  make an cstimate of the efcivenes of the mughal sy, point ot itsmain weaknesses.
cuneter xvi economic and social life and culturai.
developments under the mughals ecomamic i sicil conditons stanoao or l  t masss t mg empi siched he 2sith of 15 eonomis socal a0d ultal dvelopaent dur ag the it rl of the seveteenh century.
however, nreviewag the economic and social condions, e shal evie s devlopments o the advent of akbar 10 the middle of he vt century, e 0 s changes omouic e sl st tok plae during he ecid.
a siking feaure of the cconomic and ocial stuptions durng he time wasthe gar ing digariy betveen the bighy ostetatons koyl of the ruling lases, o the one band, a0 st poverty and wari of the people  th pesals,the aiss and the lboures,on the otber, scuny cloing was cosventonal ouh tnda, 15 we have noted in an arlr shapter, th cate ad 4 geat del 0 do iththis,hoverer, dothig s nesesary.for some pario the wt ik by the scanty clehes wor by the common e, ho obervd.ha peasint a0 peopie of.low sianding 80 about rabed.
i hen s on 1o descibe the nots o sy ot wora by men, snd he i worn.
by oo hi impreion bas been coro bratdy e el ralph filch, who e 0 tdin ovarde e ad ofthe sistenth contuy, sy g at bamaras te 50k v il cloth boundshout their midde  wiisg about the pecpl between lahoreand agr, salbascke s, the pebeisn ss0poor that the geatest part of them go k ds lust wrote tht the lbourecs bad msuficent cloting o keep themseles varm and cony durisg witer, howeser, filh absered, in he wirer vhich is oor may, e e wear qited gows f oo, and quied e the ks of the forogn el naed 1o be el withsome cauton, coming from s coldeecimate and not familar with the climate andtadiions of iadin, ths mpresion of nakedness whichthy gained was saturl, the ovecall pesson resin one of insuiciensy of loting athr than nakednes.
1t showld b remesbered tha in thoss days though coton andcoton lohproduetion was more ey dtrued ove the countysie than s presa,coth vas compuratively more expere sivethan i s ow m tems o food.
nakedaess extehied 1o ihoes.
nikiia obuerved tat the peopl of the diccan weat burefocil.
a modern author, morchad, says that bo did ncind a shoe meationed anywhere sorth of tse normadarive, except tengal, and aribe it 1 the high bou of leater, howenr, the costemporary englth raveler, ralph fitc, peaking of paise sy hongni and socal li ayd cultvral drvblopments honk 1 moonass 151 hre e women.
b o bedokedwith siver it el er, o ey rdty et ndcoppe a1 e e ey e s e s t o o rton of the tigs of s a0 rsng e od o e e e hy e on thes lo ofcommadiis which wers o b vt 1 e 2 b 1 urre was ot 1 it 15 compts o e o0, vl ek s, the o b ko e theponmn s e o sr 1wl toed mrt ot re s o s hos o s s o tomghos 4t e they had hadly smy.
esualy v vl e et rmre e o o b s, 378wt r g, o arhn s b v made, by b  e e, he ot e e vilat ot copper and bellmetl e oper e, ndcou e e xs wre et v, sty  pames o s g e s s s e by e oo, e cenory i o, tt b regurng food res, miles dnd ol it s o of ek e o vha ploert 1ad do lt all khoin ofmiry.
wivene o whos b formed he e e it .
o begal .
ki vore et e o o e cout, 14 it 1 the suth of e peuns i gt ens e i ponmsula.
tn porth tndia, chapatis made of the most.
the peassats who owned the land hea o conre o, wi putes i grec by e e e ko ta egebis wore commcn.
the cemman e, nd evense .
o s, s of tl i, e i o o e v, h ey eng el i 134 chewed e or e pl b .
hey i ot 1o o s e .
ghoe and il wet mich chupe b et .
e e y. e o foodgains hen 430 sm 10 bave 3t he.
b of e e oy s s part f e oot s o, b v bt 13 il e s e it nd g wers e sxpne.
shindace o cuivbic e alabl nd tus, i proplehad o clotes 1o ekt iy b ol b pacoe opis 30ty ere cosy on balace ey s vee s s sht b ko .
wik moe grciog ey onld e vgt sene s o o o ot ot more ik sl i o by hd or o o s s duts sk bave e avable, o the s et et v b woms o on was evre n s of .
1  ko e oot e b e oty o mor grain b and, s et ey e s o wee et sovp et 10 gevsicng i 5 whh do, s i thr chide, nd here e s tho pore o i he vilge e epors of men cuiog thr om kiad though gt o town o employmen t 0 vt orpnised et ichens a1 s0me.
pl s e o o p e bl i people o selpe, thee 44y g 0 e o s  ivorie 3 0 o e o e wnivoustle s the sandcd of iouag iy depeds s s s v amcvacon t o spon income and vages 1 gt 0. fousd smplomes s e o dctcmin e o of e e s of e v  ook moot accorting t recent studics, it seems that the productvity of e lod was e n medie val fmes.
with morsserplus land avaable for cultivaton, the sverag sz ofthe holding may also have been rger.
in medieal times, peaant was ot dipowessed from o land tong 5 he paid he and revemse.
he could ghildren inbeied his st of ight st his deah, al bhongh the sate dues were heary, someties mounting o balf ofhis prodice, ther s 20 renon o beline tht he sverage pesant was i only with enough to keep body and soel topether.
although th e ofthe pessan was hasd, e bad cnough 0 eat a0d lo meet k simple requiements.
the patiern of hus e e fixedpartly by he sessons sad.
prlly by cutom sad taditon in which fie, plgrin g, ceremonics, e, had thee due plsce.
s fur s the i weee concened, he iargnt s conaaed f he poorthe actnans, fhe servants aad saves, the soliecs, pety shopkecpen, .
the sty of the lowest gade of servant, aceoring t earopean ravelers, ws es thar w0 rupees  moath.
the bulk of the mesials 84 tootsodiers beganat lessthan threo rupees  month.
i has been clclaed that n mancoud feed s urly 00 two rupees  mosih.
morand, who wiots in the catly .
of the twentith century, observed that thre was it chaag in the resl wages of workerthey had amore balaaced diet bot jess 0 spd 08 lothes,sgar, .
morclaad concluded from i that th condiions o tho todinpeople had mot worsened.
ader the b e, bot the mttr s 0 be s 1 wider contest.
while there was a vaat inceae in walth and rise in rea oages i estope aring the peiod, thece was ovenll stagaatin, if not delie, ofving andards in odia nder the b role.
but tis a8 matter wiich il be studied in greater detsl 1o the volume on moder indis.
the rulig crasss  ths nowls and.
zuomons the nobilty, along with the anded gentsy, o aminders, formed vhat may be called.
the rllog class fn medierl iadi.
soclly snd cconomicaly, the moghal sobilty formed 2 privieged dlss.
theoretically, the doors of the mughal nobity were open to everyons.
in practice, persons belongig to arisoorate aniles, whateve they wee, indians o foeega e, had  dcided advaniage.
to begin with, the bulk of the mughal nobles were drwwn from the homeland of the mughals, turan, aod from it neghboaring reas takitan, khors san, trn, etc.
althoagh babur wasa tk, e mughil ules nevr followed  sarrow, rcialist poliy.
babur rid t win th leading afghan nobis o s side, but ey proved o be restlessand satrustworthy and soon defct i, the tusle betyees the mughals and the afghans continsed in bihar and bengal ven nder akbar.
butfrom the time of jdangi, afghans ao began fo be recruted in e by, tndies musims who.
were calid shathandes or hindustass were abo given from s e of akbar, hindss alo begn to b reruted o the nobilty on a rogule basis the larget seton amoag them was that o the rajput.
among the rajpets ako, the kackhwalits predominated.
acoording o a modern calultion,th proportion of himdos in the nobilty under akbar m 15 was abost 16 prent only.
but these igures do ot ge an ddequate iden of the posiion and ialace of e hindus, both raa man singh tnd r bistal were the personai rieads asd boon companions of abar, whit n the spbers of rvease admialstraton, rajs todar mal bad  economic and social lite and cultural develofaents under the mughals place of grst infucose andhooour.
the raiputs who wee rctuitedtothe nobilly were cither beredary s or blonged fo aristo et e related 0 or alld 10 the t t b iscorporaton.
intothe 1oty irentbesed 1t artooraticcharioter.
despite th, the nobily gid peovide an svenoe of promoton and disintion o many persons of bl orign the nobily atained aconsderble me sure of sabity under jabaoge snd stab jaban, both thte monarchs pid careulsten ton 1o the orgaisation of the oy ke manabiai ysem, orderly promotons, dis giplne and the ecrusment of compeent people ito the mperal srvice.
the mughal nobks, a we have s, recelv ed laris which vere exremaly hgh by sny sandard.
ths, as well s the lberalpolcy of the mughal emperors in maters o fit, nd th stabie poltiol condicons i indis atricted maay tsented pecsons fom foreign ands o the moghal court.
thus here was  baln dnin in everse o acoountof the i o india of ruas, turaais s0d masy ot ifn search of servie at the maghal cour e taveler, bernier, basstoed that he dsghal oty consisied of forcigners who.
entced cach other o the court.
modern revarch has shown ki satement to be illcions, whie taented propl costnued to come 1o india, snd miay of them rom 10 promineace in e seevice of the meghas, all of them soted down in tndia aod made it hic prmaneat home.
thus time us duringcarer times, o provide s home 0 many people who came from outside.
bot thes immigrants rapily asinied into the todien society aod culure, wil t the sum lime, reancng some of thes special st this scoounts for e rickaess and diveriy which s ben  pecial fentare o  indian coltre, under jahangic and shah jabas, thebulkofthe nobles lready conisted of those who bad beea bora n tnda.
smal the proportion of afgbans, indan hindsstan, and hindus in the noliity coaumed lo rik.
a tew seton among he hindus which catered the n0bilty duriog the priod consisted of marsths, iahasgic vas e frst mosarch who resled at the marsthas were the hob of afaire inthe decsan, and tried 10 win them over fo bis side.
the policy was contnued by shab jaban.
among the mantha sardurs who sored shah jabas was shat, e ather of stiva, hough b soon deected.
auriogh do g sevie o many maruias and doscust muslims.
we shall iscss moghal rlatons wit the marathasia lne scion.
howewr, i may be noted hat whi the hindes formed roughly 24 percet of the nobilty uader shah jahas, they acoouated for about 33 percent of the nobles during the secoud bl of auesagies while their toal mumbe dosbied.
o the hinds hobies, the maraths formed mors s half alfsosgh the mughal sobles eceved ex romely igh slarics e expeases wers o very high.
each noble manained e rin of sevants and attcodants, and 4 lrge sabl of horses, clhants, et and transport of al ypes.
maay ofters mainiaoed are harem of womea, which was considered sormal for nan of tatu i thore imes.
the aobls sped the mugial emperor in leading 3 very oste atiouslf.
they v i fine hovses conta ing grdess with fui ees aad ronning water.
they wore the saest clodhes nd sent ot on thie tble expeses, accordiag o 4n azount, 40 dishes od to.be prepared for cach meal or akbaz.
a lo of money was spe on s, the chojeest beig imporied from samarquad 404 bokiar, e, whic was 4 e of ey, et yearsovad by the prvieged e, jeieland ornamests which were worn 13 e i i i 4 of oo ering oty ol .
e e et per t ot et o 4 o 1  rmee to e vl ey vty bt e of spenure van s e e whh b 1 o .
howor, shosk b emerer.
g i of et o b g s eapero n eurn.
t b bon e hat the mghal nobles o i et swving bocause e deth, sl heir properies revrted o the empero becte, i theoy, everythng owed o bim, bt s 1 mot e the maghal emperon did ot clim.the propery of it soble.
howevt, when 3 nobl ded, a caretl faventory of b poperty and etate was made e, ey, the bl owed condeiie sums o money 1 the entrl reaury.
these bt ad o b adjosed bfors he property could be handed over 0 b e seconly, o cmpuror rserved the ight of gebuing 0 property of s aoble between b survving sont aecording o s choe, und 20t on the ot 30 iiddown by samsc .
amongst other g it e that.
dioghters i ot recie sbate of hee fnhers propertes.
the prosatuse smeme.ed o consderabe alays and barssument 1o e dependens of e deomied noble.
aurungaeh made a rle 8t the proprtes,of s sobl who 6 ot owe momey o the ate wee 30t 10 b stchd and hat, many cas,  ceran p ofth propery of 8 dacesed bl should be made avalablc immedately to i depesden.
nereries, of he tme.
alough we do hear ofa fow nobieswho e large sums i cash and.
gewe.
ery st the time of thee deah, mest of the noies were deeply i debt dug 1o the extrsve.
st syle of ther iving.
one reason fo this s that there were 0. adequate oults for profabie vetments.
in 4 emarkable passage, aot fu advis the nobles o mvest  e i commersl speculation and engage i rema nersive vadertakings.
these mcluded.
sle o purchae of goods.
abul fi also invied e nable o st money onces.
from the remas of contemporary escopean trave.
o, appenrs tha many.
nobler took an ateet n tade and comerce.
the english t st s, semkeg, 614 vt e b of e and sl st merchants.
foyl fumly, wcludng 5 andqueen morhers, took keen nterst n foregn s, akba wdow, he mothe of jabangr, owed ships which plied beweea surt and fhe red sea ports mir jumis, 4 leadiog robleman during the sognof accangzb, owned 4 et of ships ed 01 extenive commeree itk p, and countrs of south eust ava.
eventhe chuf qasof avrangach had commercal undectakings which he rid to conecal from e emperor thus, mdvidual oble vere not sl verse 0 takang.
part rade, and ofteatge 0 misuse thne postions o an addtonal money for ther cxpenir homever, the el of e sabilly 4. clas promotusg and expanding.
commerce 18  cottun.
generally spesking, income from and rher than commerce remained.the chiel ocesgation ged.
concern of th nobies.
the merchant bagamore 0 fes rom thethen t cxpect thi oo the patern of v of the nobes was aped by othrslawes i society 1o the extent positie.
thi sed to 2 demand for ol inds ety soods, or goods of superor qualty sconomig a, scial 1r a0 coltural dvelcpmens e i muats 198 a0 workmartip.
alhough b e emperons peopl 0 st i vlageof o brng under 204 e move vere foud of i frow oulivation.
e wscinds blogig 10 3 forigncounse, o oyt o thy wer i vilag and hacome 1he owner of e ande by the earopean rden, the.
bulk of el 1 addios to own the s ey cained, feirements were produced a the ey, cosidrais st of th sardr hd e tt i wh, a5 b had e, rs  e i ofcollcing o evose from ot very ki wec o b found i sbundase  nembr of vilags, th v caled b ol some of th soblesparcased and lga o i amindrl for colecing e p wero comeried i, ity o r, jand e, e s e s e f e lnenducon of new vaicie of fris i  he jand v which gould 0.0 1025  t hie popalariion must be cons oot some s, the aminda s ot g dec on.
of e schivemestsof 0 moghal owaee o sl s gompriea i s copeon and the.
nohlity.
the soble o dar the pesiss whoaculycloaid he rotidnd paonage 10 s of various types.
4nd couk ot e diposened 4 o0 34 uy mooy of e masaioed mocons in the padthe and v, thus 1 mindas bouwolds.
payonage wis a0 given 19 4pd o powao bad w own by puniers, poes 404 sars.
thus s sl righes o nd  cimag vas e, putoeag 10 spport .
abov the zamindrs ver th s who e eanded o s whe o e ot e o sl s snd e ek f sperios iy vit deges of atena sntooomy.
thew rapd o1 h i of s b e are s caled ey by e s duing e evetiens sty tesons wriers o ampbusie ther obordne it beweca giflacn grouss, mdividsals bt thr pontion was upeir 1 ht of 0 ecions, and  o in ihe working 1he mmdis who olied od renve.
thos, jairic e had 4 saiow el the shedevl sy, ki t soce, v giciplne 204 prope funcioningof the nol nder aurangieh and durng e, regn of sccessor.
some of these sspcte are del highy segmentd or herachcel the aindars hid ui e ared forcs, it geirally lived i forts o garls i was stquont chapis,  both 5 s of reoge sad.
sttt bl the combined forees of the zaminders vers zomours conaderabl.
accordin tthe a s akoiy fio the wiitogs of abul facl nd thei reign they e 394558 sawas, 277,057 foo contemporary aithos,  clea thet peiopal soldrs, 1563 tlephant, and 260 cannoes.
ownersip of mid was sry o n iada., the  but the zmindars were dsporsed andcoud feaeof ownerp n and depended milyon never.
feld such e force any e 1, ose seivon, b e righs ol owacoiy .
pla.
ths dgcn e, o ok e land vare being crated all the ime.
the srergth of he ubordate e, mdion wpathe amy one who i briught  the.
samndare, gseralyhad coe conoe and under cltivaion wasgonsedered it tlons on cst,can o al bads with the owner, there was plesty of calfubic wasie pessants egled o thei zaar.
they had ead o svaiable .
medievel imes 3t  consdersie local iformtion lso shovt the s 0t il for aa enterpeiing 0 of prodieiviy of and the samindare formed 156 ey smcrons snd povertl class whih o b found i over e country nder frent sames uch 3 dsbmh, o, eyt e thur v ooty fo ony cewl sehorty o gaoe o st e i die stout the ivingsadsri of he samindus.
compared 0 e noks, i income wa limied the sl ot sy have o o o ko ke e esats, howeer, o ining aaniaris o e by amindars gt bave spponched o of pety ajs or nobles.
mot of tho s sparealy e he couiryide n6 tormd .
kind of oo, dperd ol ot t o o the mamindas, there wes  g o f i dies 4 e e o s o et s, v raied e of land for her e, such s e caled e ot madadmsash 1 sighal e, nd shasan o rajaa.
athough the g wrs o  reswod by vy ok, ey o e by 10 e masy of he ranies el ol petions i a4 at of the ga, .
heme, ey ik ot real and 2 wrn b waers, i, aabins, ., ware s ofen dawn from s s, we o il i, v, of e tning ssdard of s son.
tncoe o i, s o e b o bo reguded o prt fthe rr gy, t it lon.wih the ric pessans ool gy providd iied et o prodocs of e iy, and o fo e prodacts e s typeofrml s, trade and commerce t miobia cuassisnatns o0 stadard or lo themiddle clwes ia medievsl india consd, in th main, of merchant, profes.
ool e sch 8 valdpas aad hakims snd r offcis.
we have sivady refered tothe sandards of hving f oo ofthe.profenionsl classes.
the profesional asd oficial clases were o 1 medeval i there was high degre o profesionlisn among the ndian morchants.
some spscialited 1 whoesale rde,und others in rtail trade, tho formerbeing clled seth or boiva aad the later beoparisor k. 1o souh tndm, the chotsformad the trading community.
there mas 8 spcial o, bagaras, who specisisd i the caryng rade.
t barjaras uied o more fom place 0 place, sometmes with hovsands of xen, aden wih foodgrains, st ghete.
the sl ghrofl speialed in.
chngiog maney, keeping money in depost or knding 1, o trammitting .
from one par of the cont o goods ot or destroyed in it could e ecovred.
by thes mess, the indiaa mer chants coukd eusily shp g00ds 10 counties of west asia 55 wel where there were tndian bunking hovses.
engith snd dutch traders aho came to gjurat during the sevatetath conutry found the indian finaci ghy devlope, and the odian merchants to e active aad alet.
thero was keen compeivon fortaade information and wheneve thers was shortags ofsome goods m some part of the couniry, 1t was made good quekly by the merchant.
bt tis appled 10goods of high qualiy.
food prins and bulk aticles were couly fo moveoverlad, but not 50 costly if mved by rives, heace, the major rives carned mach more goods in mediea times han son.
howerer, e to trade was lmited economic axd social li axd cultural developments under the mugrals o the vilages, while got complely sl sufcent, boaght only limizd nember of things from otside such s sall, 00 20d 8 ow commmes goods.
loagdisanc tade gevesly catred o the ecds o the afeat sctions e it the ading community i odia was faily jage in number sad rluded some of the rchest merchuats n he world.
the aames of vit vobra who dominated the surat trade for sevral dacades and who had a arg flct of ships, malaya chet on the coromandal coutt, a0 abdal ghafloor bohrs who et 85 iakhs ofrupees n cash and.goods at the tme of s gest i 1718 e e of the noteworthycuses.
there mre many wealthy merchatis  age, dk, bulsore orsa nd bengal o, t westhy merchants in the cosstal poris of gujrat lived i 4a osteatations maaner sad aped the mammersof the nobles.
they hved in oty hovses with coloured ties, wore fne clothes, rodewellaparisonedhorses and had peope carying fags and bamoers before the when they moved out in peblie.
eoropean travllers mestion the commodious a0d well it houses 1 which the wealhy mechanis of a snd db lived.
but the ordinary sorts livd i housesabove thei shops.
the freach vl berser, says tht.
the merchants i 1o ok poor becaus they wee affid that thy would te wed ke 8td spoops, s, saueezed of theic wealh.
this appears 0 be wiong becatie the emperors from the time of sher shab psed many lawsfor protctng the property of the merchants.
the lsws of saer slab we wel known, jahangirs ordinsaces icluded proviion that if sayone, whether unbolewr o mosalman should die, s property and ffectsshowld b et for bis beies, 4 00 one should ntetre with them.
1 o should bave 2o beis, ey should sppoiat inupeconsand sepaate gardians 10 guard the l propety, 0 that it value might b expended in 8 lawfulexpeaditure, uch a the buiding of mosques and.
sarus, repae of brokenbrdees and the diging of tanksand welle.
thus, the concept o prtesion ofpivee property, incudg th propety of merchants, had dealy emerged.
neverhels, foce of balic and.fnsecrity in the ciies wher thet wers common made.
many merchaats v i ordinary peopleor in 8 misely manner.
omoanization 0f taade and cousmrce rovs or enoreax tanbivo couraniss trade and commerce cxpanded in tndia doring the st bl of th sevencath sstory due1oa mumber of fctors.
perhaps the most imporiant facior was the polital itgraton of ihe ouatry uadee maghal ule andesablisk meat of conditons of jaw a4 order over extesive sreus.
the moghals puid steaton rouds o srss which made commutcation exsior, a umform tax was evied o giods st thepoin o thele ey o the eapire.
road cotses o rahdar was daclared legal, thougs w gontinued to be collocted by some of the ocal ajas.the mughals minied silve rupes of bigh puriy which became a staadard coin indi a0 abroud and thus eped indiestnde, some of the mughal policis also helped the commercileuion of he ccosomy or the rowth of  money econoay.
selare o he sanding scmy w0 well 35 0 many of te adminsisive personsl ut 20t o the aobe et paid a cah.
under the b systam, e 1and revense was assessd and requied 5 be puid i cash, even when the powmnt was eives the opton of choosng otber methods of vt such .
cropsarig, the hare o the st was generlly so in thevillges wih thehelp of griadeaers.
1 ha boca ot od that sbout 20 pereat ofthe rual prodscs as markated, which was high poportion, the gt o the rusl i ks 1o 10 the ie of smll towashps o gasbas.
the demand or sl ype of jexury g0t by, the aobie i 10 the expunson of badial pro dscton and o the growth of st acorag.
to rulsh fich vho cade 0 lodia dung akbare rigs, ay and fahour s were csch g than london.
monsere s bt lantre was soond o sons of te cies i busope or ad nersir says tatdalki s ot moch s dan pars 20d that agra o g han dol abmadabad was aiso slarse towa, beiag s frge s london and s dacca, rojmabal, molan sad burbszpur wee large towns, whie pate in bbar b 4 population o 2 k. the growth of towas and o e s one of the signfant fonture o sevateeth centary tndi.
a sudy of a shows tha 1t doubled v ducing o sevenoentscemury.
aaothr factor wheh heped jdis trde was the armal of the duich and bogish taders towads the beginning of the seven enth centry.
the indian taders welcomed e taders for they heped o break the monopoly of s trade, and in course of ine, heped o esabh dirct lnk.
between ioda sad the foropeas markes.
howeve, lke the portsguee, the dutch e eaglu taders o dsred 1o esablish 8 monogely 18 10 aablah foried wtablh ents 10 tht they could defy helca rlers.
the maghal, heefore, watched thei scoites doudy.
the portaguese power had begun 0 dcine urng the scand bl of the st cetuy, 10 war demonsted by the deet of the spvish armada by eagland ln 1988, the mion of portagal with spin whichivolved it 1o spaias eoropen svaes ad the decaing populaion of porugal sl basienedits i als, unik the portagucse, e duteh al o a0 ne i were orpaiocd o commersil s, though the mechants were infaemtial enough o ge.the miary backiog of their fovermmens wheoever scossary.
decpte velfmentporiaguese opposition.
6 duch ctablihed themsalves .
masall.
patar, obiaiing 3 farman from he ol of golsonda n 1606 they also established thes elvsn the spce tilands oava sad.
sumatr 5ot by 1610 hey.
pedormiate i the spie trade.
the duich had oiginaly come o the ooas or the ke of he i rade.
dot they quickty ealizad that spioes could be obtained mout sl agine tndan tetie.
the cloth prodiced o the coromsodal const s moskt accepable sod alto cheapettocarry, hence, ey spread south from maslipatam 0t coromandal cout, obtaining pulcat from the local ruler a0 makig t  base of ther opesions.
lice i do, the english sso b come o the coust fof he spice trde, bt the bl ofthe d who had more resousos and bad sieady calisted hemucves n the tpis oandsforsed he eaglih to concentate oa tndia afier gttt portugues et out side sara, they wee sble, ot it to et p fictory ihere 1 1612, t was confimed  1618 by  furmian from jshangi ovained sconomic ad s0cial l and cultural devlotts nder tl manats 199 gl poc.
t 1622, wih e el of the perian o, theysaptued orm, the portgucs i 5 the hesd of the p g hus, by e at guare of e vt ety ot the dutehand e engih wers i th t trad,and.the potupicss onipoy e besken fo evr.
t beri o e  go 25 s 4 dana d b th s i s v e e coniousy 254 was st by 5 e f e ey a fow shciog i asies ade e enghus sarced foe arisien which s be cxpored from tnintoeurope.
at i, the p ade was ndigy whih var vaed o cou the woolas.
the 1o ound mort i vas that produced 4 sukde n gujst ot bevisa e ags.
s0 e eaghis deveioped the xpor of indan e, s o, 0 eunope at i, the e ofguat war e o, he pupos.
as hedemad gre, o engih g he ok proded  ag an n egibouthoot, tven t was i csough.
here the coromancn war devioped 8 1. e soute of sppy.
by 64, xprt of o o the coromandal el from g, 0. by 1660 1 wa hce e from g, mo s fo st david which l devlopsd o m wes e i et of th rde.
the dutoh, foined the gl e e i, eponiing bt e snd g rom e coromodal tet gl lso eploed lot ba b movth of the rivr taden v could draw e podoce of mol asd laber by ckporing goossdowe the mver t, d91 o e e emaeed sbidary o the ouar e, more mporant were e s 0 devdop the s of bengs snd orioa.
the scivils of e porugues and e mgh piats made the development slow.
however, by 1650, the foghuh wd v them sefss up s hloogy asd at balasore in oriss, xportng from.
there rw ik .
sgat 2 addtion 1o texses, ancther e whch was deviped was th cxpar of sal pere hich supplementedthe eurepesn soures fo e powder azd which way b s n 3 bl lo sips going 0 earope.
the best saf pere was tound n bisar.
expars from the castes ress grewapidy, sad were equl 1 value 0 the exports fiom the coromandal by e end ofthe eatiy.
thus the gl and the ditch companics peaed p new murkes 4nd asie of spon for indi.
todan totles becsme 8 ruge n eagland by th s quarer of the, even eeoth cetury.
as 2 englh v wrot, nlcost cerying that wed o be wade.
of wodl o sl 1laiag.
ether to drew of the women o the farare o our hous wes suppied by the indian tade.
as  ek of agitaons, m 1701, il cbeoes paied, dyed, prniedof aned from p, ghoa or the eas tades e indi were hanced.
but these snd oter lsws tmposiog severe pemalies had il effet.
to paceof st , the export of white indias cabeocs jumped fom 2 bk pies 0s4 ik pise n 1701 134 10 20 ke b 1715, tt s afful to computethe total qanom of adonal ade geered by the esropesa companics.
moreaad, who made dealed uty, s th he et benet accring 40 inda flom the new exponts wa conned o bty snal res, bt 1 those aee v robsangal the producion o cahcropsand e et producion of et sd oter commodic e urbersengihened the trnd.
towards the growh of  mcsey conomy.
lodia.
vas e e oy kst 1o the word s, sl o the furopew mares vies  el vohsion wes aki i, bak s akap neaie octors 8 vl excope b ko iy o ol .
e g s .
t v, o, o 0 xort 0 e o t 0 by h goods et vil he scrtiog gy of o 04 sher it i comerial epassion, 14 0 o e i prics hic roughlydesbied dur ot o bl of he s sy, a ot e oot b s t, 1 eutopes e o at 10 i cport of o and sver 0 o, they g o s o, o ot bl vt o b e st s o egaonol s o s cmpn i nl who revenes o ey fo i ports.
they eoud not et a1 on 4 the mugil capte s bt v ot o o comig 58 oot wekoes of th i bt e otz derdopmnts ther wat an outburt of sy sided et activiy i india sader the moghairole.
the adtons in the ek of archicture, paitig.
ieuar sod musc cretd daring s perod et sorm d deply laend the ucorading oo, in his seme, the moghal eciod an e o ecood csace age olowiogthe.
gupta ap i other iadia.
1o ti cabural devlopmens, tnfian tditions were sz mated with the tuckorlani cltue brooght 10 the country by the mughul.
the timurid coun st semaed b develope s th cul el cente of wet and cevtal a babue s comsious of his eultnl heciage.
he was cotial of masy of the cltral formsexis lngln india end v determined o st proper sandarts, the development of at snd culure o vk reions of nde duing e fourients nd ftenthcetares bad ed o i s vared devlopment fom which it s posibe 0 drsw upon.
but for s, the caltual efforscence of the moghal age would.hacdly have e possibl.
peopes from difient areas of iodis, 5 wel 0 poopls beanging to eiflerent s a0 aces contributed o ths ulural develop mentn vacious ways.
in this semse, te cultre deveoped durng th period was endingtovards o iy nstional cultre.
ancumecrine the maghal bl magsificent fors, palces, gates, puic buidings, mosques, books water aak of el k. they abo 1ad out many for.
mal pardens wth rusmig vater in fct, ssc of reaniag vate even in thee paces and pls sur rsors was pecal feture o he mughals.
babar was very fondof gadeos rod i out  fow i the nlgibourhood of agra and labore.
someof the mughal gadens, uch a the nihat bagh garden in kashmr, the shaimar at latore, the pinjoregarden in the pusib foothill, e, have survived to ths day.
a e impetas o archtcture was gives by shet st his fimous mavsolum 8t satamm bibaand s mosque i the od fort st dkl e comidersdarchtectaral marwls.
they form thelimax of the premaghal yle o arch.
tectre, sad th staring poiat o the pew, aktas v th first mughal ruler who had e time 10d mesas o undertake constrcton on 8 lrge scale.
he buit seres of ors, he most umous of which s thefort st a built in rd suadston, this massive fot bad many magaifcent gues.
the clmax of for buldag.
was eached at delbi where stab jaban builc his famous red for.
in 1572, akbac commesced  palscocum for complex st fatehpur siki, 36 kiomewes from apa, whih be compleed in cight yeurs.
buit aop bil, alowy with  large ariicl conoigc a6 social 1178 axd cultural devalopaent uwder tis mughals eeyr ke, it included many bullings o the stye of gujurat and benga, these incladed doep exve, baloones, and fuasifl klosks.
in the pasch, mahal bl for aking the 3, al the a ol b e d k, pt s   ypes o pllars wsed i various tempes wesr employed to sppart fat mofs.
the s syl of architstue  wied most widely n the palace built probuly for 818 rajput wife o wive, bulldags of simlar tpe were sl bl i the fort a1 age, though only  fw of them have survived.
akbar ok o clote pr sonal nteest i the work of omstrution both tagtt and fatehpue ke, pesan o cootrai asian infuence can b seen i the lazed b s used for decorstion n the wal ot for dling the roch.
but the most mapnifnt bulding vas the mosque ad the gatevay o cale the buland darwaza o the loty gee, g m, a frt.
m bult 0 commemorate akbars vtory in gujarat.
the gate i the tyle of what s a8 palldome portal.
what was done was o sl 8 dnce into bt the slied porton provided the massive outward facade of the se, e saler doors ould be made n the e vall e the dome and the oor rest.
thi devis, borrowed fom tan, tecame  common fesute in mughal suldiags taer, with the conoldaton of the cmplre, the mughal arhiecturs reached 1 climax, to wards the end of jahingics regn began the prctie of putting up buldings sty of macle and decoruting the walls wih ol geigns made of semipreclows stoses.
this metbod of decoraton, clled pitra drs, be game cven more populer under shah jaban o used it on large sl i the t mabal, jostly regarded s  jewel of he buiders act.
m b, agr ot the tej mabal brought ogeter i a plessing manner all the archiestral oems developed by the mughals, humayuns tomb bulk st dt tovands the beginaing of akbars egn, end which b  massve dome of bl may o cousidoreda procurir of the tal, the double dome was snothr atae of this al no  .
uding.
thisdevie aabied a bigaer dome o bo bailt with o saller one iside.
the chiel lory of e taj is the masive dome andthe tour slender minarets lnking the platorm to the main bulliag.
the decorations are kept o minimum,defcate marble sereeas, pitradura inlay work uad kiosks chhatrs adaing 1o the effc, the building gains by being placed in the midst o formal garden.
mosquebuiding aleo reached it cimax under shab jahan, the two.
most noteworthy anes being the moti musjd o he agen fort, bl like the taf oty la macbl, 404 the conomic and social litr and cultural developkrvts onder the mughals 203 sce o e, b for, dt other the jams masjd at delhi bl in red sandeione.
a lofy gate, all, sender minares, a4 s of domes area feaareofthe jama m. altough not many buldings wer put up by auraagaeh who was conomymioded, the maghtl architctural taditions based on 3 acmblaston of hindu and turkotanian forms a0 decoratie designs, contiaued without 3 ik into th cighcenth and eulynincteenth centurie.
thus maghal tadions infocnced e place aad fots of many provincial and oeal kingloms, even the golden temple of the sikhs a antar which vas 1ol svral s dusingtheperod was bulton the archand dom pricipe and incorporated many feaures of the mugha tradtons of archectoe.
pg the mughals made a disinetve conelbs tion i the 6ld o puiting.
they ntroduced new dhames depiting he cour, batle senes 0d th chas, and addd new colours and new orms.
ty crsted a ling traditon of put i which coninued to work in giflrest pars of the couety long afier the glory of the mughals had dissppesred.
the ichnes of the syl g, was o o th fct that todia bad 2 it tradiion of paining.
whileso pam v older thas the twellth cenury have s vived 0 indcate e stle of pintng, the k daintings o ajunta arean cloquent indcaion of s vigowt.
aes he cghth ooy, the adition seams o have decaed, but paliel manuscips and ulustrted jain exs fom the hirsenthcentuy onwards show hat th tadi tion bad not died.
apartfom te jaia, some of the provioeal ingdoms, such as mabws 2nd gujarat extended thee patzonage to ptating during the eesth century.
buta vigoon eval began onlyunder akbar, whilea thecourt o the shah of e, fumayun bad ken fto bs servie two master paiates who accompasied i o tndi.
usdet thee leadecsip, during the reign of akbwr, puiating was organied 1 e of the nperl esablshmens arkbaras.
a lage bt o paloters feom diflentparts of the coustry wer invied, many of them from lowly cases from he begineing, both hindus and mt joined inthe work.
thus jaswant od dasanan were two of the famous palotes of arbars coust.
the shool devcloped apidy, and scon bocame 3 colebraed conire of produotion, apart from lstratiag persian books of ke, he paintes weo soon asigned.
the task of ilostracing he pesantextof the malabharla the nitoral work, akbar nam, 154 other, tndian themes and.
ndian sceses snd land ey  e, cans o e s e e e i e e e e e e s s .
e e t e s e i ol w b thapio tures  thrse dimensional efiest.
mughal paining reached a ol o e .
e b e g et e e  s ke e tr w pltureto bepused by dilent aria.
jahas i caios b could drtagaih the ok of ach art o a it apar from painiog b bute and gl e, ik, lr s 75 o e e r ofanmal.
mansurwas thegreat e n ths bl portat palnting b became fabon.
e undee akbar, buropean paiating was i roducedat the court by he portugese prits.
undec it inence, the principles o fors shoiening, wherhy bear and disat peogle and thogs ould e placed in peripctive was ity adoped.
whie the tradion contnved under shah jaban, aurangzes ack of atect i paiaing o3 dispenalof ha atts o et places bconomic and social lie and cultcral develdpments under the wughals i the country.
this helped i the deveop mest of paining i the taesof rajsitan and the punab il the rapsthan syl of patating combised the themes and earber tradtons of esern indi o jan tchool of paimting with moghal forms and stye.
thas i adiion 10 huring.
and ourt scenes, it had paintings on mytholo slal themer, suh 2 the dallane of krisns wih radha, o the brakmase tha , th s sons, or ragas melodies.
the pahar school continued thes radions.
luvouacs, lirsaatoas axo music the important role of persan and saaskrt a8 vhices of thought and government at the ltndis leve, and the devlopment of regonal tanguages largely s  rsalt of the growth of the bhakt movencas, have already been men tioned.
regional angusges aso developed due o the patzonage extended 1 them by local and regional rlers.
thes rends contsued during the sixeenth andseventeenth centures.
by theme o akbar, knowledgs of prsian had become 10 widespread i nocth indi that he dispensed withthe radi tion of keeping revenue.
records 1 the local language hinda in 3ddiion 1o pecsan however, tradion of kesping fevene records fa the loal laaguage consinued in the doceai sas 1 hei extiction n th st quarie of e serteencs entury.
persian prose wsd poetry reached  climax nder akbars g, abul fazl who was agrst scholar and a stist, as well a3 the lesding hitrias of theage, et 8 syl o proseviing which was cmulted tor many.
generaions.
theleading poct of the age was is brother iz who alo heped in akbars transaton depart meat.
the ranslaion of the mahabharale vas carid out vader his supervision.
ut and naskdh were the two other leading perian 25 posts.though bornia p, heywereamong the many pocts and scholas who mgraed fiom i 1 inda durng the perid and made he mgl sourt one of the ultural et of the ilam workd.
hindus also contibued o thearowih of persis ersars apar from.
lieraty and wistorial works  number of fumous detionaris of the persan lagusge et als compied during he period.
although not mch sigafesat and orisal work was done in samsken duriag the period, the sumbe of ssakrit works produced dunng the period s quie impresse.
as before, mosk of the works were produced n south 1ad.
et indis under the patronage ofocal rulees, though a fe were produced by bahmasas.
employed t the tramtion depariment of the smperor.
regionl linguages acquired sabiy and matarty a2 some of the et yrlcal poetry wasproduced darin tis period.
the dallnee of kilshoa with radba wed the mik.
s, pranks of the chid kruhoa tsd hore from bhogawe figee largely 1 lyrical poety 1o bengall,oria, hindt, rajustsaniasd gujpcat during th period.
maay devoional ymas to ram were alo composed a1d the ramayans and tho mohabhara ralted ito theregional asgusges,cspciallyf they had ot beea trandated cuer.
a foe tnesaions and sdaptstions from pessan wese ks made.
both hindus sad masims contribted in i, ths, alsol compoied 1a bengat 2ad alis transated from i the padnasa,th slory wten by  mastn suf sint, malik mubar.
mad jai, who used the atiack of aludia khlji o chtor a6 an allegory o expousd s s on the eatons of soul with gd, slong wih hindu deas about.
maye medieal findi  he b form, that i the et spoken i the nelghbourhood of agr, was alo patconsed by he mughal emperory snd hiodu ruers, from the vme.
of akbar, 26 hlindi posts began t beatahed o he maghal court.
leading mughal noble, abdor rabim.
kbankhsoan, produced fine bod of bhake pocery with perian ideas of 1 and buman reftions.
s he perian as th hindi leerey tradiions bepn to inflenceesch ther.
but he most infsential indi poct was tulids vhose hero was rares and vho wsed dilect of hindi spoken in e ease parts of utar pradesh aroud besars.
pleading fot u modifie cat sysim basd ot on birth bt on nividal qaitis, t was evncally humsnistic pot who upheld familyeals and complete devotlon o rama s way o st open t0 al, espcive of cate, tnsouth tadia, malsyalam warted s lerary cuter a8 separie languags 165 owa cight marasi resched i apogee at the hands of eknath and tukacum.
aweriog the impor e of marat, lvath exclaims it sunkct was made by god, was prakiit bomm of tieves and knaws lt thse erings of ity alone.
god 50 paian of tongues.
to him prakit aad senskre are aie.
my ianguage marathi i wsthy of expraing the bighest sentments and s rich laden with the s of divi knowledge thsundoubiedly xpresisthe etimeats of sl those weking i local oguags, it tho shows the confdenc 4. the st aouired by thee langunges.
due o the wgsofthe sikh gurus, puribs eeived 3 new e, musc aacther branh of cullual i in which hindas and muslims cooperated was sk, akbac patrnived tansen of gwaor who  crdied withcomgosicg mazy new melodis agan jbangle aad shah jahan a8 wel s many mughal nobles followed this cxample.
there are many spocrvbal stoie about the buril of music by the othedox.
aurasgish, eem recent resarchshows that aurasgaeb banlshed sagiagfrom biscour,but mot prformance of museal instruments, tn fct, acrangash b lf was a0 accomplished rena payer.
mosc in ol forms continued o be puirozied by aurangasks queens 1n the haree o by the mobes.
that is why the large.
mumber of books on sl tndian mosic i persin wete writen during auraagachs reign.
bat some of the most important devlopments i the 8eld of muske 100k place later on i the cighteenth conury during the regn of mubammad shab 172045 reticious ionas avo beriers axo prosies o intboason the baakemovement continsd apie dur ag the sixtoenh 40d seventoeah.
cenuris, amongs the new movements was the sh movenent in the pusjab and what s calld mutarushins darms in mabanuhis, the sikh moverent had i origi wih the presch g of nasak.
but is development i closely lisked with he nsticton of guruship.
the st toue guruscontianed the tradiion of et modiaton and.cholarbip.
the g gur, adjss das, completed the compiation of the sikh serpturs calld the afi granth o gramth sk to cmphasise tha the guru combised both spiciual and worldy leadershi in bis perion, be begn 1o v in 12 arbtocrte syl he erecied loty buidings at amritar, wor ineclothes, kept e horesprocured from contal asia 234 maintased reainens in 4t tendance.
hie sk sated 5 sywem of collect.
ing ofrings rom the sikhs at the ate of cas.
esth of thls iome.
akbar bad been desply imprened with the sikh goros and, s said, viltod them t awic saz.
howeve,  clash began withthe imprison ment and death of guru agun by jabange on a charge of hbiag ebe piace, khusay, with 5conomie ayd social li and cultural davelopments cnorr the mughals money aad prayers his suocmsso, guru har govind, wasalo mprisoned for some time, bt he was soan se fee and daveloped good rltlons with juhengic and accompanied him i bis jorney o kashmie fust before his geth.
bt he came into clah.
wich shah jahan on  busting incident, by this time the guru had szmaie following, nchuding pathun con tngent ed by painds kban.
thers weresrks of kirmhes and.
uitimatly the guru retved o the punjab ool where he was not ln ererd it thus there was o strmosphere of confroata tion between the ikhs aed the mughal ruers g s perod.
not westhee ay sywema.
e perssution of the hiodus, and hence, o ocetion for he sikhs oray group o et to sund forth 25 the champlon of tbe hiadus agains elgous pecsection.
the oocasional conflct between the gorus sad the moghal ruers was personal and policeal athr haa.
rlgous.
despiosome dislay oforthodosy by s b o the begioning of ki regn aed o few cts of ntolerance, such s the demolidon of new temples, he was ot saerow la s oullook which was furter tempered.
towards.
e nd ofbis egn by the nfuece of bis eral 500, dara.
d, the edest o0 of shab i, war by temperament a scholar and  sul who.
oved to diconcse with relgiousdivies.
with the help of brahmanas of kas, e ot the gita translied.
into pecsian.
but his most signi bt work wa an anthology of the fodes i the ntroduction o whih dara declared the vedas o be heavesly books i poat o ime 254 i conformity with the boly qurar, thus underling the bl tht there was 0 fenda mental diffrence besween hinduism 04 l, masizs,or o botber with the reveled srip w tute o the two, assring the indivissily of the brakma or the suprere realy.
the same bera trend can b sec i the e snd works of tukara v, the supreme cxpo neat of biakel in maharashica pasdiarpar, whichhad bocors he cere of the muharahira dharmaad whers worshipof vithoba, s ormof vishau, had b popula.
tukaram, who statesthat b was borm 4 sodra wed o do 7o o the god with bis o hasd.
1t was a0t o be cxpecid that such iess and.
pracioes would be casly accepod by the orthados clemeats belongie to the o lad g fiths, induise o tlam, e thus ivewp the catreached posiion ofpower and ialuence which they had enoyed for 4 losg time.
the setincats of the orthadox hindas werecchoed by raghusandsa of navdvips nadi bengal, considered o be the most lfucatl writte on the dhsramubasirs doring the metievl period, raghuoandan asicred the privleges of the brabmanas stting that nose other cxcept the brabamasas had the right 10 cead the sriptares of to preach.
he eads p by sayng that i the kall age there et osly duies.
ramanand of mabsrashis, while  ting forvacd a phiosophy of actviam, vas equally vehement in sieriag the priviegs of e bramanas.
among the musti, too, whik the trend of taid continedapaco, 32 was sappored by many lading su i,  sl group of the orthodox wlama eacted agaist it and the ibecal poiies o akbar.
the most senowed e in the moslim orthodor.
and el movemeat o th te was shaikh abmad sir hind, a followse of he othodox nagehbeodi iehool of sufs whch had bes ltroduced  tndia duing akbars reign, shaikh abmad sihindi opposed.
the consept of punthestic myiciom i ot the bl the ey of godhead denounciag it 35 uname.
e iso opposedall those practices 1 beies which wer due o the infaence of hinduim, such at the ke of muse n elipous atheings ama, excessive mediton, visting tombs of sauts, et in onder o asert he lsamio character of the sate, b denanded reimasin of is yoh,a e st twards the hindus and the nisinum asociuion with them by musin in order to implerent ths prograame, he sarted centres and also wroke leters o the emperor and o many nobis o win them over i side.
fiawerer, th ieas of shalth abmad had lite impact.
jabaagic mprsoned b for clmiag 3 sats beyond that o the prophet aod only released him alr bisreracion.
nor did aurang ay any speial atetion o bis son and suecesor, tl thos besca hat the e ofthe ortodox thinkees aad.
preaches was ipeed, epieval dda being necosarlycofined to marrow lrces.
their chie hope was that thee ideas would reeive the support 254 backing of those who held posions of wealh and powe in socety and the sate.
on.
th otber hand, th libeal thiokers made theic appesl o the broad therecarren yclsof hberaliom and ortho dory in tndian istory shoud be seen aguist the uation which was rooted in the trutare of tadian society.
it was oncsspect of the scugglebeoweenenteesched priviegeasd pover on the one hand, ad the calitacan sad umaaitic spiations of the massof th people on the otber.
the prstas and infueace of the naceow, orthedor.
dements and their massection of do s and belely vas  barcec 1o the growing process of rapprocheaent sad.tole canes atong the votares of the w0 domioant egons, hinduism s tsam,and .
hindrance o th prosess of ultua integation.
the cash betea the two treads came o the surface during avangebs gn.
exercises 1. whatwere the marn componests of the maghalsobisy .
descibe ther vay.
ofite, 2. decrbe thelviag conditons of the comman peopie n the moghal empite.
3. disuss the positon of the amindars in todia doring the mughal penod.
4. desribe the postion of radesed commercein tndi i the severteenth centary.
whst wasthe satus enoged by merchaats durisg this period  5. describe the activities of the european tradivg compasics in fads in the aeveatecath sentury.
6. how can the mughal period becalled th second clsscal g i indsan story 7 dieo 7. desribe the growth of srchiecture under the mughas.
descelb the contnbation of the mughals o pasmting.
what were the mais themes of mughal paintings 5. desribe the growth of hteraore during the mughai perod.
10, what wess the maia trends in religous dens in the mughal period how dud ey sivence the prosess of ntepration chapter xvii climax and disintegration of the mughal empire1 probiem of sccrion tre lis years of shah jabans regn were loaded by a bier war of sucemion.
among his soms.
there was o clear traditon of soceson among the timarids.
the right of nominaton by the ruler bad been scepted by some ofthe ml poltisl tinker.
but it could not b asered .
india darig the solanat priod, the thourd rditon of puritoning.bad not been succetl eiher and was eve appled f inda.
hinds tradiions were not vry cleat i the mater of swcevion cither, awcoring to tuids, a comtemporary of akbar, rle had e nght of givin the fika o any ov of is fon,batthet wee many cass among the rafuts vhere sch nomiation bad not beea asepted by the oter brothen.
thus sanga b 10 vage biter stuege it ki brobecs beforehecoud asert i cain 0 the g, the growing rend towards stuggle o he hionc amory brotbers vas e of concern sk jaha durag th aterpar of s riga.
fourofhis sons, daa, shula, aurangzeb and mad, had ben caelly trincd for govrn et and in e ar of e they had becn plsd in command of imporan.
cumpagas, a5 s the moghal practic,end entrusted with e responsbility of looking aftr the i of diferent proviness i the empire.
each o them bad proved to be able and energetic.
sk and murad had made 2 mack for bravery, but were sothful and esedoving.
dacawas knowa for his ibera views in maties of ceigion and as  patron of learning,he was aflable, asd had won over the conidence of i faher who eaned on i inceasingly fo advc in matiers of gowrmment.
but dar wis vain, with ll aeual expeciance o waate and s veats proved, poor udge of human characer, on the other hand, aurangieh had proved t0 be o 00d organizer.
an able commandant and  shrewd negotitor by paying court to indivi dual sobies, both hindu and mosli, he bad won ovee many ofthea o hisside.
thas, from the oute,the e contest appeared o be bet ween the edes son, dara, and the thied 100, aunagash towards the end of 1657, shah jahan was taken il st delhi and for some time, his i was despaied of bt ralled and.
gradually reoovred his ucength under the loviag care of dara, meamwhile all kinds of umours bad gained curtncy.
it was sad that shah jahan had already died, and dara was soncemling the ealty o serve his ova purposes, afler some clmax and desntiration 0p the mugra bxfr  time, shah jahan slowly made his vay to agra.
mesawhie, th prince, shoja i benga, murid i gujert 324 aurangzeb n the decca, had.
ciher been porsaded thatthese rumours wertue, o prtended o el them, and made.
preparatons fo hecvitble war of ucceon.
at to avet 4 confiet becween his soas, whih might el i o the empire, and anticipaing bis speedy end, stah jahan now decided to.
nomioate dary 4 his scossor valiahd.
he rised darss messab from 40000 78 o the umprecedented ark of 60,000 dara was iven .
chtienext o thethrose snd all the nobier were jastrcted.
0 obey dra 35 thee fture soveeign.
bat thse actons, fux from ensuring 3 emooth sucesion as shah jukan bad hoped, convioced th tber prin oot of shah jahars partaliy to dars.
it hus srengtheocd thle esole fo makng  bid for the theone.
1t not necesaryfoe s o ollow i detail e events leading to the uimate triumph of aunogeb, there were sy testons for auraagbs success.
dividd sounse and un desimation of bis opponens by dara were tmoof the major fctors esposibl fo dary dcdeat,on heacing ofthe ey preparaions of s sons and heic decision 0 march 00 the capia,shah jhan had sent anaemy 0 the st ied by daresson, salaiman shikob, aad sided by miaa raje jai siogh to deal with shuja who had crowned himself.
asother was seat 1o malwa under raja jaswant sigh, the rler of odpar.
o ki arrival i malwa, jaswant tound.that be was faccd with the combinad forces of autangacb asd murad.
the two prisce wer intent on  confle ad.
fnited teswant t stad aside.
juswaats strucions wer vage.shah jabtn b istruced i 0 bar the sdvance of th princs to the capital and 10 parnund them 0 go back, a0d in any cute to evold enteiag into  miliacy contict m it them, jaswant could have reteted but deeming rtren o b mater of dishonour, he decded to stand aad fight,though th odds weredeiiely gaiost i this was 3 mitake on ki part, the vitory of aursagich st dharmat 13 aprl 1639 cmboldeaedhis supporess aod mised bis prestge, while it diaprted daa and s supporiens, meansbile, dara made 3 seions misske, overonfident of the steagth o his posiin, hehad ssigaed foc the casern canpagn some of ki best toops.
thus be dosaded the capialaga.
led by soaimn shikoh, the army movedtothe xstand gavea oot accouat ofiel.
it sucprised and defoted.
shs neas basaras february 1659. it then desided 10 pusue him into bibaras f the e 4t agra had boen already deckled.
afer the defat of dharnat, expres etes were sent 1o thse fores to hurry back 1o agea, afer paching p 3 hurred traty 7 may 1659 sulaiman shikoh sarted bis march to agea from k cump neac mosghye in eatern biar.
but it was adly kel that be coold rturn t0 agra i time for the contt with aucangb.
after dhaaat, dara made frani efors tosek sl h s ropnted e 0 ju.
et singh vho had retieed to jodhpur, the ramaof ubuipur was aho appronched.
juswant singh moved out tardly 1o pushkar st ajme, aftr riing an aumy wih the money provided by daza, e waited ther for the rana o foa him.
b the rao .
ol ceady beea won over by aucmgizb witha po mis of  uak of 7000 and the etua of the parganas sczed by shah jaban aod dactfrom.
him n 1654 olowing a dispute overrfort ying chitor.
ausagzeb aio hekd ot o the rat 3 promie of religious frowdoms and favours equal to those of rana sange t, dara fuled 0 win ove cven the mpor at rajpat rajes to his side, m th e of samugarh 29 may 1658 w25 busaly bl ofgood geneii, e 150 i e st cpaly e n aurbers gabou 55005 6030 ach e in this .
darn s 30 o for auangi t hade rajpus and th sads o b pon wham dare gl depended could 2ol ke v fo e e of e e of e ranly rcroed .
ausangics 10 et e aoes and vl .
aot i ol sons prtendd ot iy e of comin 1o aga s 0 50 b 454 1o s .
fom the ol of e herial daca dt the var s a 12 dt s ipows orhodory on e one b, 5 toeaiumon o stbes.
toth mo 0 hinda sl were sauslly gvided in e 1o .
v vt we e arsdy t e v o e e rt .
ok conit a5 i 1o many other, the sita of the nobe dependd upon.
it eonat inccts snd 1o shosisbon.
it i s a sagtion hd b e tosish b ettt sl ofsamagath.
that b okl b 1010 aurangh 1 e i fo b, o ek the s0 .
penon.
1 sl i b toe cours would ave bad ey e, tons bawven e 04 ton sving b el eute, bt by e gt ke ek 1y peon, shah akan i gl ot whoere won, the egne o poner v 5o jomer b hed by i auagt frd sash ok o sueer by verng i souts of wate upsy 1 the o sha jhan s sty sapeved 134 oo 0 the el sparimets s the fort oeugh b et ot st thes b o it oo yeurs, lovingly nud by hi vt daoghier, tbanaa, who voimasly e 10 v i the for.
she eemerssd e ko publc e s jaasdeath and wes sccorded rea hosour by aurangieb wh otes.
ored her o the posion o the s lady of the malm.
he lso raed her annaal pension fram vele akh rapet 0 seventen lk, accorting o the terms of aurssgres sateement with marad, he kingdon was 0 be partioned between the two.
dot avragseh rad no meston of shaiag he eapit.
hooce, be trachecously mprsoned murad and sent n o e owlior .
he wes illed two seans e, at losing the bt ot samagarh, dacs bad 8 1o lahore and was planniag 1 reala contel of s surrounding areas, but aurang.
2 soon served 1 the nelghbourhood,esding trong army.
darss cownge fuied him.
he sbandonad lahore wihost  ght and e o sindh.
ths he vietally seuled s fate.
alhough the vl war drsgsed oa for more han o year, 6 outcome washarly in dou, dats move from sindh i guiratsnd then into ajmeron an nviation rom jeswase sngh, the rler of marvar, and the subiequeat tra chery of the latir a7 to0 well kaowa.
the batle of deora neus ajner macch 165 was the st major bt dacs fought gt au rangb.
dars might well have sicaped inty t, but he wasied 15 oy bis ek agia fn afghanista, on the way, in the b pas, reacherous afghan chet madehin prisoncs and handod him over o s dreaded snemy.
x pasel of junstsdecreed that dara could st e e to e ot of mecesety o protect the ah and holylaw, and abo for reatons of st 1 a4 0 destaoye ofthe e penc.
this i typial of the maanee in which auraag 25b wed religion 4 2 closk for b politeal motives, two.years aler dacss excoution, his son, sulkiman shikos, who had sought shlier i th rule of garhwal was haoded over by him fo.
aurangash oa an fmmiaeat clbay a0t ditntrsratio 0f i mugral bare 1 et o avasion, e soom suficed e 32 ate a0 i faher.
earlr, ascangpeh bad defesd sl kbajuoh neae allabad decamber 165 funer campuigaing agaios him s etrusied to mir ol who bid sty e presse 1 shuj wes hounded out of lada o ars kaa apel 1660, soon sherwards, he and his ty et  dshoncurabl deth e hasds of the anikaasse on 8 charge of fomeatiog teelion the civil vt which kot he empie s e for more tan two years showed tht et omnation by the i, sor pans o divsion b empire wore lkely 1 be sccopted by the costendrs for the thrope.
miltary fore be e the anly e for aucesion andthe ol ware boame stadily more gestruc.
n g seated sesrely on the theon aurangah tried to migate o some extent the s of the harsh mughal cstom of var et betwees brohers.
al the istanee of jahanars begam, siche shkob, for o dar, vas el t peson 8 1675, gn s o and mard 1o 0 dsaghiee of aueaoga, murds son, lazat bakish, vas sl recas, e manseand i fo another et o aursagb, ealler, o 169, danis gghier, jum bepum, who bed.
bes losked.
e by abanara s e cwn dasghter, s e i off to aurangass hird sor, nhersmad aoam.
theee e mary oiber marrages beiwein aurangashs fumly snd the chidren aid grndehidren of n dested brosers, tows, i the thied gencaton, the fmles of aarangah tod i efntd bochas b o aurangaehs relails religons plicy aurangi i fo slmost 80 yers.
dur bis g rig, the maghal empe esched s taroril s, at s eght,  sreched fom kashsie i th ot o 1 s the ot n snd fom he hindush .
the wos to crlta rong i the east.
aurmagash proved 10 bo 5 rardvorking cul, and et spassd bt o his subordiaai n the ks of goverazet, o ltersshow the slose aenton he pd o slaliin of st o wasa rct dicilio an who did ot spar ks own son.
i 1646, e impriored.
preve musizam o3 3 charge o atlgelag wi e e of geleoods, od kept hum 12 prion for 12 long yers.
h other sons s had o a8 s wrt o vriows oo slons soch was the aws of aursgb that v ot i e, when moszzars was gover ot cf kabol, h emibied ey time b rsived e o s ather.
unkis i pradesnsoms, aurasgre did no ik ostentation.
fospersonsl e s ke by sspliciy.
f hd th re putaton of belsg s orpodor.
godisaing musn.
ta coure of time, be bgen o be 1o garded 53 ndep,or  i k bistorans ar, boweve, deply dvidod according tosome, heseversed akbars ooy of lgous tleraton asd thus updermsed the loyl f the hindus  the empite.
acsordisg 10 them, i, in tur, ed 15 popslar upeiiogs which sapped the ity of the cmpve.
hi suspious natre add 1 4 problems s st e words of kna kb, al s enrpises wer loug draa oue aad ended i e, some other hstorers thisk that auringeb s been gojatly maligocd, tha the hindus i beorse dlogal e ot ity of auraag.
by predeceson, s0 that aurasga had mo apron bot 1o sdopt ersh.
mthods as oty o rll the masbrs on vhone sapport n the long run th capie bad o 1, a ew ted s, howerer, emerped 1 te et wros o8 aurangieh snd elors bave teen madeto s avrages poliid  rlgous poliies inthe gontet of okl ecnom wnd inssuional deveopmeats, there 18 ke doubt at by 2 eoperament auangab wa anorthodox suan musaiman.
he was o iteesied i1 philoso poical debats or in mysceismhough he did ot debr s som from dabbling o sufom whie tking i st on the hanafi ehool of musie law which bad been cdicomlly fol towed in inte, aurangazh dd sot befist in g seeular docres, called sawab.
a com o i decres has ben colsed t 3 dotk zovabialemgit, theoretcaly, the sonabis spplemented the shoa.
in pacec, tovent, they ofen modifed  the shars in o condilon obainng n idia which e ot provided for in the har.
i spact fom eingan orthodox mustm, aurangieb was albo  roe.
he coud hardly e potsical vty that te ove whelm g f i was lind, o ha hey e eeply atached 1o her fih.
aay poliey vi eant e complte alinaion ofthe hin s and of th powerfl hinda ot aad zamin ars was obvioasly savorkable.
in asalysing avrangebs eligons poley, v may ke note bt of what ave bcn caled oral ad relgious rgaltons.
at the begin ting of his egn, he fobade the ksina teng.
ontebed on coln it 3 coinbe rmpled nderfotorbe deled while pasing from band 1 haod.
he discontined the etival of now o a1 s consderd 8 zorossrian practice tvoured by the safavd rles of iran.
muhe sy e appoited in 3l the provisces.
thes ol were sked 1o se that people tred ther lhver t accordaace withthe ra, thss it vas the business of thesc il to e that vine a0 isoxicatssch a3 bhang wer not consumed in publicplcer.
they wete ko responsibl for reglating the rove of i zpute, umblng eos, .
and for hackig, weights sod messurs, i clher vord,they were respossibe fo ensuing hat blag forden by the shara 3 e vt eciar o were, a5 fae s possibe, ot routed apenty, 1 appointing.
mubtosbs, aurangash emphasised that the state was o  poniite or the moral wellue of the cizess.
but hese offclals were nstructed not to nter fere i th prvas ves of ciaens.
latr, i the cventhyea of his el 1669 auraagass took s numbar of messues which have beea called puriaaial, but maay of which were realy of an cconomic and socil racer, s0d sgainst supersivous el thus, he orbade singing in the court 1ad the oficsl muscass were pensioned ol instumental music and.
saubat tbe roml band wee, hoveve, contnucd, slaga 4o sonted 1o be putonisd by the lsdas i e harem, and by adividual nobles.
1t s of scme inerest 0 not tht the largest mumber of pesian works on clasial lndan musc were writen i aursagaets rign and that aunagash hielf was proficent .
playing the e, ths,the e of aurangzed o the protesing muscans hat hey should bury the bie of musie they were carryiog dep.
caderthe carth so that o cchoof may rive apaa was only a sagey femark.
autungh dicontioned the pracie of jparcka.darshn or showiag bimsel o the publs from.the balcony sice e considerd s supentioss pracice and aganst liam.
simiarly, b fortade the ceremony of welghiag the cmperor agast gold 2ad siver asd.
other artide on b birthdays, this prctics which wes appurely sared dusiog akbars rcgn had bocome widespread aad was a busden on the smaller nobls.
but the weght o socl opison wis too muchl aursagaeb hadto et this cesemony o s soms when ey fecovere from nes.
he forbade astolopers to puepare almasacs, but the orer wes outed by eveybody inclading meabers of he soyal faly  clmax axd diintegration of the mughal bnpre many oher regultion of sl natur, some of moral charcter and.some to e x nse of wuseriy, wee ssued.
the thone.
foom wasto be fsished fa chesp and simple sy clrks wers to e porolain akstznds ouesd ofsverancs ik othes were frowned upon toe goid rulng in the dvarbam were tepased by thoe of lpl larll et on g9l erven the offcal department of isoryweog.
s discontnged 3 measue of sonomy  to promo trade amorg the mslms who.
depended ot cxclusively on sate suppart, nrangacs at it lrgey excmpted mosim.
mdars from the payment of ces, bt he o0n foand.
tat the musin caders wes abusing it venpasingoffthe goodsof hindumerchants s their own to chest the sate.
so auruagied reimposed the coss for musim tader, byt kept 0t half o what was chared from oers.
similrly, he ried.to reserve the poss of peshtars 0 karors pety evenue offcal ot musis bt so0n bad to modify it in the e of opposiion from the sobles and lack of qualifed muslis.
these and other steps of  simiar nature o not scesaly dencre growing puritaism on aungasbs part.
the matives were di st 53 we have moted.
b, s i the case of the cxuton of dazs, auraage thought it prodent o bask up s decsions by seskng he spprovalof the dergy.
thos, whea aurang b vas keen to crowa imsl afer samu s, o flt o couid not do so lepally gl b fuher was sive, the cief qu at the court was o prepared 0 giv u decee that it i legal for aursagasb to acend the throne ath 1 stuaion.
fiaally, abdul waha, who had b 3qus in and bad joned.
nutangsss i the doccas, slenced the  s as by aryuing tha sie shab jahen vas vy wenk b of his ag and b el et sffd, sad the tanqulty sad the welle of he people bad safleed astbuck, he ecin of the khuba i the same of e on who capabie ofrling ovr tho sulanat s permissibe aording o the s, aurang e rowarded abdul walab by makiog b he chiel qua of the cmpiee  s sleof jusiying poll, economic and.
other acions by referace 1o the shara o sasking the approval of the clrry vas 0 undesiabe tead.
it sppears gt aurang s wante to haveth legy on s sde sice the dlrgy sl eercied  povertal hod on the minds of men.
a modern historan, st induath sarar, hs sgeesed it auangasb warted 1o pose a5 an orthodox musim fa order o make the publc forget his ok trestment of bis father.
however, puble prodence and aurangebs own pesonal bl might rave led him o the sume iection.
we tay now tura our sttenton t5 some of the ctber measutes of aunngreb which y le clled dscriminatocy and thow  sesse of bigotsy tovacds people proesing ober teligons.
the most imporant s aurasg 26 atind tovards temples, 20d e leving of seyoh at the ouset of his rign, auangh ieated the posion of e shara repiding enples, synagogaes, churches, i, tht loog sanding emple should e be.
demolbed but no sew temples alowed 1o be built further, odplaces of wonkip could be repaired sioce buldings camnot st for e t posion in deadly pet ot fn  sumber of extant farmars e sued o the rabmasss of bagars, vedavan, etel t b e 1 i b n lo bt nl o srs 2  ot newome, t rafienad the posiion whih had xiied during e sulana peicd and whch b e rlerd by shah catly n b i, inprcice, i e wi iatiude to th osa oficia pretion ot thewords ongstandisg tmpler the privie opinion and sentment of the e n the mater was s bowad 0 weigh ith the offlals.
tor cxumple,aher e e o the tierlwinded dota 4 shah jabans ivourt, fow eyt had b demolished n urkuse of hs onder repadiag tempies.
auangb, 05 govermor of gunat, ordered snumberferpls n gujart o be ooy which ot et merly baking the s and lovag down the templs al the outiet of b rn, aunsogsb oundthat inags o thes tampies e rnord a0 4ok wonhip ml bon tosd ausagaeh, herlre, ordesd sgein in 1665 that thee e be detoped.the fumous.
temple ofsomrath whih he orderd o bo detroye i b egn vas spparnty o of e s entoned s, hoveer, it does ot e tht aursagaehs ordr reparing ban on new temples ed o  gl destrction of temples 3 e outet of the g as avangaeh encouner.
e poltsloppotin from 5 number of quates, sch 5 the maraths, jat, i, he e 5 v adopted 3w stase, in e of confic wih local ety be now comideed it ettt desaoy even lo, standing tiod teples 38 8 mesvre o pusiihrent 4 w8 varog.
focthr,bo begn o lock upon.
temples 5 camtrs of sprending subversiv s, tha i, idss hich e ot acsepabletothe orthodox demnents.
thus, s lok st ation wheahe et n 1669 ha i s of the temples i thas, malt ard specallyat bsares, bt hlindas 14 sl v o come rom st dtanes 0 leam from the brsbmanes.
asrangs e oder o the overnorsof all povisees 10 put dovn such praciees 3nd g5 destroy he lemples where sch practes ook place.
s resil of thes onders, 3 e o tenpes r 30 thefamoss terpes of viswunasth at banaras ad the femple of keshave rau 0 mathara bl by bie singh deo bundely in the rgn of jabangi were doseoyed and mosques sicid i thee place.
the de raction ofthes templs bad pelitical motive a0 wel.
musid khan, asthor o the maash.
e emperors itk and the grandear of s v 0 god, the proud.rajs were sl o amaement hey sto0d ke images faciog e wil 1 s i 5 contnt hat many teples bl 0 orsaduriog the last ke o v yeam were alio destyed.
b it s wrong otk that thre were any ondes o the sl dsroction of templest bt the s uatlon coanged daring peiods of bl vs k, who wrote b hvory o a 22 e 1oy e ey 14 who bt s oy s, s aaanga, fer e  e e i i s e emper rtrc 1 g 1o ekt 1 el s 10 v bl e of o of s bt a t t mosd koo venon la xd disintsoration of t mughal exfireh ths daring 167960 when theee vas  state of hoslty with the rathors of marwat and the raa of udsipur, many temples of old sanding were detoyed ot jodhpur and s pargana and 2y udaipur.
in s poliey towards temples, aurangaeb may have emained formally wiia the frume work of the shara, bt there s litledoubt ha s sand in the maer was asetback o the polcyof broad toention followst by bis predeessors.
1t led 10 climate of oimon that detrotion of temples 0n any cxcuic would ot oaly be condad but woukd be welomed by the emperor.
wi we do have insances of grants t hindu templs and maths by auraagzeh, on the whole, the s phet puserated by aurangachs policy towards hisda emples was bound o create dsquiet among large sooons of hiodos.
howerer, it teums that aursogzebs zes for the des rocton of temples abaed atr 1679, for we do 5ot hea of any laspescale destrution of lemples .
thesouth between 1681 and his deth n 1707, bt 8 ew iccan, thegisyoh o the pal tax was fatroduced in the ieral.
we bave ateady cxplined the backgeond of tho jyah aad s ntroduction in todia by the arb and tusksh nlers.
awording fo he shars, 1 o musle siae, the phyment of jiyah vas obligatory.
we or the non muslms.
akbar had abollbed it for ressons that we have soted.
however, a secton.
of orthodos theologins had been giatingfo the revivl of iy 50 tha the supecir posion ofthe mulims, icludingthe theologiaas,could t ty  e s e poutan of tha sy 1o e sk 64 s b the son i o s g e b .
o o1 hey ot s condions, 4 oy o s i, e nk rav o ey s 10 1 i b e g by m k wm be made manifst 1o all.
we ars tod that afer accemion o the throns, aurkagb con templted vl of the fyah on 3 mumber of cecaions but did not do o fo fear of poliical oppostion.
ulmately, ia 1679, in the cmentycond yeac of i roign, he fnally relmposed i there has been 3 consderable diousion among htoriaas for aungreds ot for the .
let us it see what it was tot, tewss ot mesat o bean sconomic prosure foc foreing the hindss to comvat o ttam for itsicidence was 0o tight wormen, chldren, the disabied a0d the ndiget, hat i o whove income was lss than he netns of subsitence were exempied, 25 wer those in goverament servie.
nor, in fact, did say sgibcant secton of hiadvs chasge thee relgion due o tis tax.secondly,  was sot 4 means of meeting s iflculfnsaclal suation.
altbough the income from jiat s 4id to have beencomiderable, aurangasb secibosd a consideable sum of money by giviag up  latse number of coes calld sbvals which were a0t sanctioned by the shora 4ad vers hence comided ligal.
the remposiion of jieyah was, i fct, bty politics and eologi calinnatase, tt was meant o sally he muslms for the defeoe of the state against the marathas and tho rajputs who were up s, and possby againt the mol sttes of the deocan, copcially golconds which was in alliance with the e, secondy, jizyeh was 10 e collected by hovest, god teating msins, who wereespeclly ppolaied for the purpose, and i proceeds.
were reservd a for the oit was thes a g bribe for the eologiens anong.
whom there was lot of usemployment.
but the dissdvantages out weshed the posble advantages of the wep.
i was bitdy reented by the hisdus who consldeed i a5 ack o diserimioation.
16 e o cllecion also ad some special eat e, the payee was equised o pay it per sonaly ad sometimes he sllerd.
hilision at the bands of the theologlans n the proces.
siac in the rural aeas jisyah vas collted wong wih the land tevenue, only welkodo hisdus in the cites were subjeted to these praties.
we, thesfoe, heat of 8 nusber of ociasions when hind traders shut thei shops axd oberved aaial apiet the mepare.
103 number of insasce,the amis o colltor of jfiyoh was kild, but auraagach was enting, and was relucant o grant exemp ton for paymant of jitya tothe pessans, evea when remisson in and rvenee bad o be given onaccount of nataral calamies, some modern witers are of e opiaion that aunopets measures were deigned  comvert india from  deralberh or 8 land of infdels nts darattlam,or s land inhabied by musins.
although auraagaeh considersd it eglimate to encourage comverson o liam, edence of sysematcorargosale atempts at foied converion i ackiag not wero hindu obles dcriminaied agaiss.
a recent sady hasshown tha the mumber of hidus in the h e ol o, vl 15 et b ke s m v dor s .
t ok it e s wh b 1o e mt i 13 s o puy ok vee s a prsciedseplscpring.
o e shrir e he e t kb ot e v of e tats e b kot sadh, he miriha sl o d 11 177221 e mol st bt  ot 5 iy darin the scond balf of aurangaebs teign endly incresed, il the hindos nclod ng maratas formed sbout opehicd of the nobity 25 sgaiot ooe fourth under shah johas.
s one cesason, auragb wiote on peton in which 8 pos vas claiced on rlgious gounds what conection and what ight have wordly afairswith rlgion  and what rght have macers of religon o crter fato igotry for you s your rligon, for me is mioe.
i this rule saggesed by were esablshed it would be my duty 1o al inds rajas aod their followers thus, aurangzeh did not ey o chasge thepature o the state, bot resserted s funda menally toamo charster, aursagaebs elgious beliels casnot be consideed the umk axnd disitegration of tie mughal bb sacted plundering the seighbouring ares in cding mughal terrtories and royal nighways.
afer seting biasel on the groe formally, auruagaeh smbarked upon.
52 era of srong i1 some cases, such s the mordbesst and the deccan, the imperil frontir wat adrances.
however, o genca, autangash i not embark upon a forward polcy.
his it stempt immediately afer s ucoesion was o reasertimperial suthority and prodiee.
ths included tocovery of seas which had boe lot durag the war of sucees ton and 1o which e mughals fetthey had el clsim.
to begin wih, aursngaeh was more coscerned with cossoldaion han on.
qust and annecatcn.
thus b sent an army o bikaper to enfore obedience to the moghal emperor, but made no efort o ansex it but n another cuse, vuch 05 palasau 8 bihar, the ule who was aocused of disloalty wat disposcsed ad the bulk of s sate annexed the rebe bundela.chie, chacpat r, vho had boca an ally of auragaeb at a bt had taken to a e of plunder, was rlenisly husted down.
but bundela lands were ot e northeast and exst biote wo have mentioned in an eucir chapter e rs of the abom power 25 defeted the splcavay kisgdom aod i 1612 occupled the western avars valley up lo bar nad it the help of kuch arms.
the kueh ruler became s moghal vasl.
t the mughalscam oo contact wih the aboms who ruled ewtern awam o he bar nadh.
afiee 3 long war with te aboms who rad harboured pisc of the deented.
dynast, a ey was mad withthem ot st in 163 which fasd he bar nedi 2 the boundary between them s the mughals, thus gaubati came under moghal sontro.
there was 4 long drawa out war bewesn the moghals uad the ahoms ducing e regn of autungach.
the war began wih he stcmpt of the abom rules to expel the mughals from gaabati sod the neighbovring aten sad thus complete ther conrol over asam.
mir jumia, who had been appoiated the goversor of bengal by aurangs b, waated to make bis mark by beinging cooch bikar and the catite assam uader mughal ule.
he fint ssabed cooch bibar which had repudiated mghal suzeaiy and smnccd the ntie kiogdom 1o the mughal empire.
he new invaded the abom kingdom.
mic jumla occupedthe abom capital, gachgaon, and hed it fo six moats.
nex,he peaciated up 1o the it of the ahom ko, snaly foring the aoe king to ke  humbitiog testy 166, the e bad to end his daughier 1 he mughal harem, pay 3 large wac indemoiy aod annual et of 20 clephans.
the mughal bousdary wis exiended from e bar nadi to e bhara rher.
mic jomla ded soon afier his beilant victory.
howewr, he advaniages of orvand move o asiam were dovbiful siace the 2 was n0t rich snd was surmounded by warlke ribes livig in the mountins, 1t was fouad that the buck of ahom power bad aot beea broken, aad that it was beyond moghal power m o entoce the traty t 1667, e abomss v the contew, they ot ony recoweed e ares sodd o the maghal, bot alio otupiet gushut.
farber, the moghals had s buen cxplled from cooch biar thus 0t gae of e jumla were rapdly ot x lon, deshory warfsze wih e aboms ating deade 320 3 wl ollowed.
for 1 ong seriod e command of e mogha fores e wth .
ram singh, therler of a bt be bt had the resoures.
fo the sk fioaly tr faghalshad o giveup ven guhai, snd s endary wet of .
the ot in avsam showed the s of e mgl power 1 fu g aess, nd sl e skl wd deemmisation of the aboms who avidd.piehed buis and sdopeed  mode of menll warare.
suviac it e 1o 1 adopled vl simlar sucees by e opporcns ofthe maghals in other ares.
howerer, e shock of the mughal invason .
e equent waure undemned the tcngh t ahom monarehy nd jd o the e 51 inegrucicn ofte abom epire.
the 1 s had more sucees elihere e shesta kban, who sucesded m jumla a1  goveror of besgal after i st ack s 1 hads of shive, proved o bo  oo it and o sl geeral.
he dot e jumas forward poley.
fiet he it up an aprenent wib the riler of cooe bhar.
nextbe gavehisateation  e grblem of south beapl, wherethe magh ardanes ices, inconuacion with fiigs portgues piaes, kad bemn teroruing the e tn dacn from theie hesdquarers st chingor.
the land v to daces bad bsome s e wnd indutry b sullerd s setuck shasa khan buit   gotl o e the ak pirses a5 capured e land of sondip 35  bae of opertons saint chitagong.
next, b won the ficng s ot idebndscements ol money and fvours.
the arakas nevy e chitagons vas rowted and many of the ships captued.chitagong s st asualiod n captared carly n 1666 the destuction of arakanc navy was comp lete and opened the s to e commere, s was 20 minor fator 1 the apid growth of bengaly forign tode during the pered 04 e xpansion of cltvation i cast bengal.
in orita, the ebellon of the pathans vas put down sad balasorereopened fo commeree poruan rrvits anp mo ron rocowal inompece i, aronas, preeg e withie the emprre, aursogzeb nad to deal ith a nuaber of dilfcult polical probiens, fuch 1 he problems of the marathas in the decean, the jus an rajputs  norts india and 1t of the afghass and kb n the nori wex.
some of thee problems were sotnew, bt had 0 be faced by auangiebs pre decssors.
bt they assumed a iflerent cha facter under aurangab.
the nature of these morenests s vared.
in the case of the rajputs, was basicaly a protiem of suces sion.
in the case of the marathas, it wis 4 question oflocalndependence.
the cash with uhe jats bad s pessantsprarien bickgrovsd.
the nly movement i which rligion played 5 ol was the sk moremest.
b the jatand he sikh movements calmieated i atempts 0 st 5p independent regonal states.
the srvg e of the afghans was iial i characte, bt here o the et f seting up sepacate afghan state wasat wark.
thus o and socul fucors, 44 well as the sentment of regionalindependence which contined 1o bo stcng wice majo factors in shapiag these cliax asd diitsgratin of tr moghal ap 1has sometimes been agued thas sl hese moveamerts, excluding the afghan o, repre oot  hinda toaston agast aurangzebs rtow reigioss polcies in a country whets he overwhelmisg sction o the peopizcongit a4 of hindus, any moverment which came isto soasio with the predominantly mustin cestal bovernmeat could be dubbed  chalnge to tiam, likewie, the loadrs of tese rebel morements could we reigions sogans o lymbalsto broaden theirappeal.
hene, we mtbe carefl n asalysog the real mature of thee movemrts.
jets nd samomis.
the st secton to come o cosfet with the mughal governmant wero th juts of the agexdelh regoafving on both sids f the hver yomuna.
the jais were mostly pesant exkivatos, only ew of thnbeog savindats.
wth strongsens o brotherhood andjuste, the jats had cfen come st contics with the overnment s takes to sbelon, taking a0 vastageof thee diffclt terai.
thus sontct with the jatsbad aken plce dariog th regos f jabaagie sad shab jahan over celction of iaad evenue.
since the imperal road.
o the dasoan and the wesera sesports pussed through hs are, he moghal goveraent had takan s srious view of hes.
rebllions nd taken e messures, in 1669, the juts ofthe mathurs regon broke out .
rbelon under 5 leadership of loca taminar, gokla.
the rebelion tpeead rapdly amons the pessans of the.
area 0 aurogzeb deided 1o maroh in peron from deli o quel .
althouh he jat s bad sweled t0 20,000, hey were no match for e orgaslsed mperal army.
i a s0 bettle the jats were defated.
gokla was captared sd cxmced.
however, o movement wes ot compleely o crosbed and disontet continued o sivmer.
moatwhile, in 167, thece was another ared conflitbetween the peasanis and the moghal ate st narsaul, ot o from mathura.
this lime the cenct wis vit 5 eigioue body caled sutaais, the satoamie were mouty peasuats, arises an low cste peopl,called oldemiths,carpeters, swaeper,tannts and.
other fgnobie becgs by s conemporary waie.
they did not observe dsioctions ofcate w2 rank or between hiodus sad mslims and tollowed it code of conduct.
statng from aclah widh o joal oficll, it soon amumed thecharscerof an open rebelion.
agen the empecor had to march f person to s i, 1t s nteresting o note that the local hisda zamindars, manyof whom were rajpus, el with the maghals o tis conic.
1 1685, there was a ecend upeisingof o jats wade the leadesbp of rejtam.
the jats wer btercfgaisd tis e ad adopted he mathods of guerila wacfre, combiaing i with plunder.
auraogaeh spprosched.
ran bishaa singh, the kacbhwwaha aler fo rush the uprisiog.
bishan singh was fuujdar of mathura snd the ente arca wes aravted t kam ia amindar.
confct betwesn he jut an the ralpets over eamindar righte compliated the isse, most of tbe primary amindars, tha i those culivaing pessant who owned the land beog jats, and s inte modiary zamindars, tat i thote b0 collected the land reverue bing rajpts.
the jaispat p sl eistace, but by 161, rajuram 120 bis succesor, churaman, wers compeled to jowit, however, vares smong the tt pes ants conteued and thel plundeing acivites made the dehiagrs rond casfe o traveles.
late on in the ghteenthcestury, taking advantageof mughal civil warssnd weakness i th cenrl govertent, churesan wat ke to carvecut a sparsc jat princpality o the m area and 10 oust the rajput zamindars.
thos, what apparenl sared 3 pessants vprie was divered fom s charater, and clminaied i sut i whih jat chiesformed the rbag ey the fhons avrsagasb came o conflet with the afghans sio.
confict with tbe bardy afghan riesmen who lived n the mouniaia regon between he punjab and kabal was not sew.
akbar bad to ght sgust he afghaos and i b process, ot the e of biscose find and conbdun, r biekal conflctwih the afghan rbesmen had taken plce duing the rlgn of shah jahan s, these conficts were partly sonom and party potcal snd rebgious, wt e means of neshood in the rugged mountais, the afghans had e picn bit 0 prey o caravans o to envol in the mughal srmies, thie fiers love of fresom ade savice in e moghal armes dificlt.
the moghals genrally kept them happy by piying them subidies.
bot growth of popsiation or e e of an ambitiousleader courd led 10  breach of this tact sgreement.
durig the regn of auraogish, we e  new surcing among the patkars, in 1667, bhag, the leader f the yosafzas e, pro climed as kiag 8 person pamed mubammad st who claimed descent from an ancient royal tineage, and pocumed humsell his wair.
tt wouk appea that among te afgh s among the jats the ambitionof st sgarate tate of their own had begun o s a rebigous evivals movement salied the rauahana, which emphasised src chcal e and devotion toa chosea pir had provided o michectusl aod.
moral backgrosnd to he gradually, bhagss movermest sprad il followsrs staied avagig aad.
plundering the e hazen, attock and pesbawar dtscs and brough the trafe in the khyber 0 0 sandal.
tockear the kgber and crush the sprisng aursagieb deputed the chet bakhabi, amie khan a rajpot coningent was posied with m. afer a senes of hard butles, the afghan esitance vas broken.
but 10 waich ovr thes, n 1671, maharsi jaswant sngh, the ruler o marwar, was sppoinied 35 hanedar of .
there was 4 second afghan upramg in 1672, the leade of the oppostion s time.
was the afrds eader.
akrmal khan, who pro claimed hinsel king and sicuck khutba and slkka in s rame.
ho declred wa agaimt the mughalsand summoned all te afghans o jin him.
accordimg o  contemporary writr, with s folowing more.
nomerous than s and locuss they closed the khyber pass.
mowng forward o clear the pis, amin khan advaaced oo far 24 soffered 3 dissstoas defeat in the arrow defle.
the khan managed to ecape it bis i, but 10000 mea persbed, and cash and goods worth we crores were ook by the afghaes this defat brought other rbesmen no the ry incoding khush hal khan khatisk, 4 sworn enemy of auraag.
2 from whose hands he had sufleed i prisoamens or some tme.
tn 1674, ssother mughal soble shast khan, sufferd 3 disstrous rout 1 the khyber, buthe wasrescued by  heroe bard of rathars semt by jaswant singh.
at lst, n the middie of 1674, aursagaeb hmelf west 0 pesbavar and remioed 1 the seghbourhood tll the end of 1675, slowly, by force and diplomaey, the afghaa unied froat was ke, and peace was slowly restored.
the afghan upnsng shows thatsetimeats of reistance 1o the mughal rle and the rge o regionl reedom were oot confined 10 se0 tions of hindus, such as jats, marstnas, e, alio, the afghan upcsing helged o reax moghal prane cn v durn  il e 1 e et  0k ol e oy b he moghaa s d atete 5y whch 1 s hed stovaed el ad e o an ancs i b ot i gl the skks the sikhs wete the st 10 come o mill tay confict with aurangash.
as we have s, there wasconfic with the sikh garus ing the e of jahangic and shah jahan.
bt he resions fo the confiet were polaical and personal rther than regous.
the gurus had sared iving 1 syle, wih an armed fo.
owing, 154 isamed th it of srchcha pad hamever, there shah the true soveregn was 0 conflictwiththe guru 1675 when guru teg wih fiveof is followers, brought fo deth and xcuted.
the cavies of this e ot cea.
accordingt0 some persian accounts, the guru had joined hands with 4 pathen, hafiz adam, and crested dstcbances 1 the pomjb, according t0 ikh eadivon, he xccution was dse 1o irgues agaist the guru by some.
members o bt amly who.
iaputed ha e cenion 124 who had been jorsed by cthers, bt we a1 a0 01 tht aurangieb was an noyed because the goru fad comverted  fow maslin o sikam and rased protst aginst.
rligions persecuton 1n kashe by .
iocal governr.
11 dfiull 1 st the rith of hese algiions.
sikhism had gradually spresd tomany jatpeasanis 0d lowcarie asams who were atricted by s wmaple, sgiliasan sppeosch.
the tconome disconien of thess overner, saf kisa,  balde of beidges he w4 humsoe 3ad broadmaded persen who had  hindu to advise b m adminiuatve matiers stores of mass perscuton by he rew gonr o appeas 10 be e gora tegh babadur foreed the sk 10 g0 back t the pumib il 1 lsofd t the sin movemeat gradually turming 1no 3 miltzry brotherhood.
a maor cont sphere was made by gura govid singh.
t showed considerabi organsations abity sad tounde the mibtary brotherhood or the kil 1699, before thin, gurs gownd sagh had made s headquartcrs ot makhowal or anend purin the footills of the purjah, at frv, he local hinda bil rajas had ted o ve he guru and s followers in therr miermicios quarce, but soon the gurs bacame to0 powerful and a seris of clashes 00k pace betueen th hill ajes and the goru who pen ally rumphed.
the orgumsston of he ks torhe streagibened th nds of he.
gurs 11 his conflct.
homever, open beeach between he gurs and he hll s 0k place only in 1705, when the combuned orces of  nuner of il rajas stacked the gurs at asandpur the rajas bad again o retret 128 presed the mughal government 10 ieervens sgaintthe gur onthie behll.
the truggle whic folowed was thos not  t t 3k dinon e s same 48 sher afghen.
o g s 171 e ks kb t s aess wheh e e ey e ot 1 e s rligions sivggle.
1t was iy 3 offiboot of loal siviries amonythe iods hill fus and the sikbs and artly 3o outoome of the sikh movemeat 1 bad deveoped.
aur, 28 was concernd it th groving pover of he gars and hd asked.the moghal el estes 0 admonish the g he pow wrole o the govemor of lahorsand e tauidar of sichind, wase kian, 1 4 the bill s i cotic with gurs govind smgh.
the mughal force sslied amandper bt the sikis fought bavely s beat ol ausals.
the maghas and e ales now isvesed the fortcossy.
whenstararion bega e the fort,the gurs was fored 10 open the.
gate spparely o0 4 promise of safscondoct by wase ko, tt e th fcces o the g e crosng a swelle sea, wear knans torces mddenl atcked.
tws of the gurs sons wee captared, 424 on thee efusal to embrace i, wer bebended at sbind.
the g ot w0 of s remaining sonsin another bt afer i the gora e fo tawandi a0 vas el not diurbed.
s doubiful whebe the dasardly actons of wazi kban sgint tho scos of the guru werecaried aut ot the ntase of auresgih.
aurange,  e, wht ot ke o dseoy e garoand ot 0 the govemor of lakore 1o concle he guru whea the g wroks 0 autange i the desan, spprsing i of tho events, auriogze isvied im0 mcet i towards e end of 170, th g et ot fox the decc and was 0 he way whea avrang ash .
ascoding 10 som, e had hoped 1o e et e s s o v pow altbough guru govind siagh was s able o widwand moghal might for fong.
of to stabish  separte sieh state, be crated raditon sad ko forgd  weapon for s ralsion laer o0.
1 sl showed how an epiliarinreigous movement could, wnder cotan ircanstances, ua o poitcl sad miltsrisc moverent, and sl move owards regona independence.
we have s how juhasgesectd in 1613 the long drawa out contict with mowsr.
inbangic contnued akbars.
poley of giisg fivours to e ieading rajput mjas and of entrag into matrimonial reltions with thee shab jaban maitained.
he alance ith he ralputs.
during b regn, rajpu contngeets served with dstincton n such fe g sreas a0 tho deccan, balkh fn cental aui 4ad quadhar.
however 0 rajput rja was sp pointed govenor of provece, asd b furdher matcimonial reltions were made with the lead g rajput ajaethoogh shab jaban hinell wasthe son of  ratboe princes peshaps, alasce with the rajputs haring become con seldated i was ol that matimonil elaicns i th eaing ajs were 30 loager scesary.
however, sha jahan accorded high besour 10 thebeads o the two leading rajput hovses, jodhpus snd amber.
raja jaswint s, the e of marwaz, was igh in shab jabans faveur.
b be asd jui singh held the rasks oi t000t000 3 the time of avranpibs se comon.
cumax and disintegration 08 tis mogtal whtiel ance with the rajputs,he tried 1o secur the acive soppor of the mabarans of mews and rused his mansab from 30005000 10 6000 60, athough jaswant singh had.
fought sgaast hin t dbt azd defered from e during the campaiga agunst shuj and avited dars o s domminions, auraogach pac doved him and retorod b o s provious mamab aad he was appoinied o imporiant commands, iscluding the goversorship of gojaratjo sagh remained the lose fiend and contdant of autangzeb.
gl s desth in i jaswsat sigh who bad been depuiod to ook after the aus of tho afghana i the nonhmes did towards the cad of 1675, the mahartjs had o suriving male s and hescethe queston of sucssica to the addi immedisely aroe.
thers was longstsciog.
maghal radiion that in e of  dmpated succmion, lh statewas leought under moghnl dmnisciion khaisa 1o sasure law 0d onde, a0 thea handed over o the chosen uc camor.
thus in 1650, when ters was a ispute about sacession in juwalmer, shah jahan it ook the sate vnder khalise and then sent juswastsiogh st the head ofan army o mstal thecandudte choscs by the enpercr, thers was sncther resson siso for brnging merwar uoder hialsa, the mabarsjs, lke mow moghal sobles, i large wums of money due.
1 thesate wich e had not been sbi t pay.
back.
many rajpats, whom juswaat smgh bad annoyed, o whoe trctries hud beea asted o bim s jagic by the cmperor, ware age 10 ue he abacoce f  eler o the gudd of odbpus to create distrbances.
aviipatig reitance from.
the ratbors, asopst bad sloted twopargancs i marwarfo the maitenasce of the umily and supportcsof iaswaat sogh.
he o sueabl 4 4 sirong army 4ad marched to ajme to 25 entose his ordes.
raol hadi,th chief queea of aswaas singh, who had been objcting 10 handisg over churge of jodbpur to.
the mughals, snce it wasth vatan romeland of the rathors, had no opion but to submit, a illgent search s sow made fo any hiddea trotmtes tht juswask singh ight bave pos s, misghal officials wore posad all ovr marwae and onders wero asd.
at now tempis hould be demolibed or st et cloed down.
thus the msghals bebaved s conquerers and eeaed macwar as bl rvory e diffalt 0 1d a josiscation for this.
how.
ever, aurangash hud 10 iseotin of reaisig contol ofthe exntory of marwar, 0 sccomnt of its wntegic imporance i lnking dethi wih the gujurat sesports, as s bee seered by some hsorian.
two s had bee o at libore 0 two rasis of juawast singh afet s dowth.
thele ca 10 the gad wat rongly canvassd.
however, beloe raching dl avracgaeh decided 0 award the ko of jodhe pur o lnder sngh, the grandscn of jaawant singhs lder beother, amar singh, i reuen for s sucesion e of thiryix kb of rpess.
periap, aurigieb was moved by the arpu mest that shah jaban had dooe 4 gret  ticein pasing over e laies of amar singh, in goiog the tka 0 his younger beother, jaswant siogh.
hemay abo heve waated 19 voud 4 minorky sdmiecation o merwar.
acscuding o seme moder bisorins, auragzeh offred jodhprs to ast sisgh, the s00 of jaswaat siagh on cosdiion of bis becoming a musim.
there i 50 such sogges toa i contemporary soures.
acconting fo contemporary rajashasi work, fukumat st ba, aurungaeb ofleced manias to at singh whea he was prsented k. tho court i agra and declaed that the two pargans in marwar, soist and jitaan, would coutious s bis g 2 thas, avrangze was vietally contemplatiog a prition of the tate of marwar between w0 brenches o the family.
the rathor sardars led by durgadas, ejcted s profered compromise which they el ouldbe againtthe best interests of th e rsgeted st the reecton of s offer by the sar.
dam, aurangreb orered tha the prices 32d this motbersbe ot in cofinement s the lot of nurgarh.
thi sarmed the rathor sardars who fter 3 valisat fght made thei excape from apa sloag with one of the princes, and crowned him as a sigh at jodhpur amidet st rjocing.
aurasgzeh miosi have geacfuly accepted b fact hat nder singh had no fllowing among the rathors.he set aide inder sigh o ipcompetence but adopted .
stern, un beading atlitodo tewards at singh, deiaring bimto be 3 pretende.
sirosg fores were summoned from 8 pars of the capire and one again, aurangaeh marshed to aimer.
the rathor reitusce was crsbed and jodbpur ocupied, durgadas fleeiog with at sngh to movar where the rana st bim lo 8 sceet bideout.
t was a s stage that mewar estred the war on the sie of at siagh.
rana raj sngh jodbpar 1o back p the clam of rani hadi appury, bs wasdecpy opposed to maghal intrfeenc i theierml sl of the raj pets,sch as qustons of suesson.
apart fom s, he ouned 3 gievaoe af moghal eforts 10 detach from mevar the states to it souh and west dungurpar, banswars, .
which bad st one time tribotepaying, ependent roers.
bt he immediate cave wis i unese a the mughal milary occupation of mawar and autangees rfection of at er 1679 he atucked mewar.
a srong mughal detachment seached udaipur and even raided thecamp of the rana who had retreted deep into the hills o condct  againtthe mughals.
the war soon reched  of the rajputs.
the war became highly spopular, aurasgzebsadmonitions and warn g 0 his commanders havag it cfet.
at s, th edes son o aurangaeb,prnce akbar, riedto ke advantage of this siustion by oring o armsagaint i fther.
1 allance it the rathor ehiel, durgadas, he mrched 0 ajmer ganury 181 where aurangi was heplss,al b best ro0ps being engaged el where dot privce akbar deayed and aurasg.
22 was able o sur up dissesions in his ca by fle leters, prnce akbar bad o flee maharashtra and.
auangseb heaved 2 sigh of ey thecamparga of mewar sow becamescond ary for auraugieh.
he paiched up  resty with rasa jagat singh who had succreded r raj singhin he meastime.
the new rana was fored o surender some o ks porgan ticwof fiyoh snd was grasted  masab of 50000n a promise ofeysty and ofnotsapport 04 al sagh.
regarding aji siogh, al that auraogasb wouid promise was that marsab asd t would be given o b when be cume of ag.
this agrectbot and the promse regurdag ajc singh saisid sone o the rajpuis.
the mogass kept theis control on marwar sad denstory warfae coatinued 11698 when st las, at siagh wes esognied 2 the ruer of marvar.
but the moghals refoed 0 elax theis boid on the capial,jodbper.
the raza of mewas, o, emancd dimatisted s he sr. reoder of e parganas 0 the moghals.
there climax and disitegration of the mughal whfre was o change n th sitvaion il avrasgzed diedin 1707, avraagzebs policy towards marwar s0d mewar was clamsy and biundering and brought 50 advantage of any kind 1 the moghals.
o theother hand, moghal falre agamst these saes dumaged moghal mltary presige.
tt is rae thatthe attles in marwr after 1651 1. vobved only a few troops, and were ot of much consequence milsrly.
1t s atotrue that hada and kachehwaha and.
other rajpot contingens contined o serve the moghal, bt the resuls of the marwar plicy of aurang 2eb cannot be judged solly by thee.
the bresch with marvar and mewar weskened the maghal allance with the rajputs at a crocial o period.
aboveil it creted dowbis sbout the siranes of mughal support 10 od .
trusted alles and the ulerior motive of aurangib.
wase it showed the rigid and.
obstinate maare of aurangaeh, 1t did not, howeve, show  deermination to subvert hinduism a5 has e lleged, because durin the pesiod ater 167, irge.
mumbers of marathas were allowd excry o the nobility rismg e properton.
of the fidus m the nobilty from abost 24 pecent duing he roga of shab jahan 1o about 33 perst.
while aurasgzes confcts .
the ok east and with the jats, afghans and rajputs put strain on the empice, he el condic lay in the decoan.
exercises .
decribe the evens leading 0 autangashs acession.
2. discuss the religious vews of aurangzeb, tn what respcts did they afltthe policy of the sate 3. what is meant by jiyoh discuss the ressons bekind s reimposiion by aunagzeb, 4 discus the cavss ofthe jat aad afghan revolts against the maghalcmpie during aveangaebs g, 5. discuss the rltions hetween the mughal state snd th sikhs duingthe reign of aurangasb.
what were the changes at took place in the sith movemest duing ths penod 6. trace the istory of rajputmughal eatons during aurangzebs eign.
were there any basic change n the maghal poicy tovards the rajputs discus, crapter xvil climax and disintegration of the mughal empire2 t i of o marthas wi nave sinady seen that the mrthas had importat postions i he adnisstaive and miary syems of abmadragar and bispur, s that thei powe sad ifucnce i the aflics of govenment bad groms ashe mighal advasced towards the deces, both, e dosani e od the moghals made o bid fo thee spport aod mk aabar e e i bis army i lage sumbes 35 tooesuxiaicn allioogh 3 nuber of atienl maratha feniisthe motes, he ghutaga, the nimbalkas, e, cxeried ol authorty i some s, e marthus i ot vy lag, welsablsbed sates s the raiputs bad.
the credit for setingupsoch  lrg state gor o shai bonsaeand his s, s, as e b seca, fo some e, stabj scted 30 g kiogmair s abmad sagar, s0d deied the mighas, fowerr, by e treaty of 1636, shabt yeldd thoterc toies bo wis dosinatiag.
e jised the s of biapur s0d tered b enrgies 0 kmatks, tokog advatag ofte unscied condions, shabp id 0 st up 4 sem iyt gty b ot mit jusla, the leading nobie of golooads, tried 10 oarve out such a prissipality 0a the coromandalcosst.
a number of oher chiefs, such as the abysinian chiefs 08 the western coast,the sidi, bobaved i a similar manner, this forms the backgroundto shivjs attempt to carve oot lacgeprircipality around poosa.
eanix canes of survan stabji bad kft the poona agir to bis neglctd.
sefor wife, jja bai and b misor son, shivsj.shivaishowed his mette when at g young age of 18, be overran 8 umber of bl fors vese poonarajgarh, kondima and toma in tho years 164547, with the death of bis gardias, dadajt kondadeo in 1647, shivaj became his own, master nd the ll control of his futhes jgir passod under bim, shivaj began his ea caret o conguest in 165 whea e congquersd javlifrom the marstha chief, chuncra.
rao more.
the javi kingdom nd.
the sccumulated treasure of the mores were umportant, andshivaji sequird them by means of teachery.
the conquest of javi mado him the undisputed mastr of the mavala ares or the bighlands and.fredbis path t the satar area and to thecoustlsrp, the konkan, mavli foot soldier became .
strong part of bis army.
lay and diintigration of ths mughal botre2 with theic hlp, he further srengtbned b poston by scquining  furter ere of il fors neas pooss.
the moghal invasion of biapur in 1657 soved skl from bijapor reprisal.shvit s entred i pegoiations with aurangaed sk i ot he grant of al the bilipery tntorien o bed and other areas mclding the port of dbl n the koakan.
shuvajs the chesged sides and made deep nioads ot mughalsces, st rich ooty waen avrangieh came 0 tems wih the new bispur tl .
prepaition for the el war, he purdoned sty aiso but e dstristed shival aod admiod tho bjspur rule o expal i from th bispur aress be i sezd, sl i e wested to coploy b, employ b karmatiks, avsy from the mughal fosters.
with auriagzeb sway in e sorth, shaji reumed s carer of congues st the expense of bijer, he bunst o the koskan, he costl s between the ghats and the s, d seusd the northers part of it he sho verran  nuater of oihee hll forts.
bepar nov decdad 5 taks stera acton.
tt went gt shivaj 2 prees biapan nobe, al kban,  the bead of 1000 troeps, wih imscictons 1o capiare aim by any mesns possble.
treschery was common 1 thve days 0. both afrl kb 208 shivaj had rseted o teachry 0a number of ocasons.
st fomes wero 20t wed to open fghing and bk from 50 open confet wih this power ful chiet.
afml khan sent sa inviaton o shivaji foc 8 persceal fierview, promisng to gt b pardoned from the biapui cour convineed that s was a trap, shvai went prepered, and murderedthe khan 1659 m cusning but dariog mamaer.
shvai put tenderts army 10 tout and captured ol b oods sad.
equipment incudiog his ailery.
flashed wih vitory, the marath ro0ps cver  ran the posesulfort of pashala and poursd ato ot kenka and th kolhapur dutcts makingextasive conguests.
shajis explods made him s legeadsry gure.
s name pusd from howse 15 houte and e vas croded with aurssgach was susiously watching the rie o maratha pover o near e mghal rontirs.
poona aad dcen sess hich had been parts of the abmadaagar ingloms had ben tressered o biupu by e teaty of 1636 batthes ares e now clumed by the moghls.
aurangied usruted the new maghal governor of the decean, shlsta khaa, who was el to avrsagaeh by marmags, to mvade shovas donmsions.
a shab, the ruor of bispur, was sked 5 cooperste.
the al shab sent s jauhar, he.
abyusisan chic, who nvesed shvaj i puntel.
trapped, vl made bhis ceape il paala fell 0t bifpurt frcer the adi shab, boweier, bad 50 dente o shivj destoyed.
heace, b took 50 further inteet in the war agaist sive, a0d so0n ame 0 0 scrtsndersandin with i this fieed v 0 deal with the mughals.
at i, the war wentbadly for shvai shaisa khin occepied pooea 1660 uod made it s henduartes.
he then et deackmets o west contol of the keskan from shivj.
despite harasing atacks from shwaj, 0d the bravey of maratha defondes, the mughals secured hee control on norh koskan, driven fato s corner, shivas made  bold s, he infltted mio e camp of shisia kban s pooas, und at mght atacked the kie a b haten 1663, illing hi son and one of n captans 1nd wouading the kban.
ths daring  tack st the khan into dsgrace and shivis ek 1o once agin.
in ange, aurungzeh asiered stista.
khan 0 bengl, oven resng o give niman nerview .
he e of s 35 was the cosom.
meanwhie, sk made motber bold mowe.
he atacksd sorat, which wasthe premics mghal ort, and toced it 0 i heas conent 1664, e ing home aden with rasire taskr on purandar ayd survais vise t0 aa after b filur of shasts kb, aursog 2 depoted raja jai seagh of amber, who.
st one of the most tusied advisrs of aurumgae, 10 deal with shivaj.
full ary snd e wuthordy s confceed o i smgh 50 that b was no i any way depr st on the maghal vicroy 1n.
the decean, 2 skt ey with the emperor.
unlike s pedocenors, i singh did not understioate he macattan he made careil drplomatic a0 miacy peparsions.
he sppeaed 101 he civas asd opponns of sava, and even i 10 win ovr e sulan of bjap crder 10 olae skoaj.
marchmg o poons, jai singh dockod o strike o e heart of shiveis temtoricsfort purandar where shivaj bad g i gy .
s s s sagh ey besiged puraadar 1663, beaing of al mt atemps o reliev it with the fll of e for m sght, and so reef el from any quurr, shivai opened negotistions wih ing s were agred upon.
ot of 35 forts held by shivay, 23 forts v moundingteritory which yilded 3 revcae offour kb of auis cery yar were 1o b scvndere 10 the moghals, while he remsiing 1 fors with an saaual mcome of ok o s wereto be et 0 shvaj on ondiion ofsrvicesod loyaly to he throna al do 9 teratory worth four lakhs of hunsa year fn the bipuri konkan, which shiva had alcedy held, was granted 0 him.
in addiion, the bijapue teritory worth fv.iakha of s  yea m the uplancs balaghat, wheh shivi was 0 conquer, was abo frinted o bim.
in stom for these, be was 1o pay 40 kb huns 1 inalment o the mughah st skod 0 be excesed from pecsonal svicheace, mansab of 000 wis granted in bs place 1o his minor son, sembha shives promsed, however, 1o join personslly ia asy moghal cimpuga in th deceta.
1 siagh cleverly hrew  bone of conten tion between shvali and the bijapri rler, bt o sk, b el o upon mughal support 1o s p from bipur erhory woththe amount he had yielded 10 the maghals.
thi proved 1o be the jatal fr aurangzeb had not lost s reservations abost shal, and was dowbifulof the widom of a fint mughal.
maraths.
atack on bispor.
bt jai sigh had larer idess.
he considered the allance wih shivaji the hartag pont of the onqucst of bispur and the eatie deccan.
and once thi had been done, shiv would have o option but reman an ally of the moghals siace, asjai sngh wioe o aunngieb, we il hem shiva n bk thecentre of circk.
., the moghalmaratha cxpedton put iled.
shivajs who had beea deputed 1o capure fort panhala vas a0 nccesstul.
scing hit grandione scheme gollsping before s ees, i singh persuaced shives 0 visit he emperor at agra.
1 shivajs and aurasgieh could be reconcied, jai singh thought, aurangieb mght be persvaded to bive preaterresources for 4 renewed nvasion of bijapus.
but the vistproved fo.
e  disnter, shivaj o insuied when he was putis the categoy of mansabdars of 50004 cuma and disintegration of t8 moghal smpire2 rank which had been granted carlc o bis tmor s, noc did the empercr, whowe riday was bemng celebrated, fnd time 10 apesk to shivajs.
honce, shivaj walked off angrly sad refused aperial sevce.such an cpuode had never happencd, and 8 srong.
roup at the cours argied that excmpliry punshment should be meted ost 0 shivas in rder to marmain and assrt mperal dign sice shivaj bad come 10 agra on ju si ssmorances, avrangzeh wrote 1 jai singh.
for adnce.
jai singh strongly argued for  lesent reatiment for shivji.
but before sny.
dacion.couldbe taken, shivaj escapd 1 deintion 1666 the manser of shvaj excape i 100 wel known f be repented here aursagieb siways bamed el or s cariessness insllowing shaji t cxape.
there o bl doubt that sivas.
agra vt proved to be the turamgpoin for mughal celtions ik he marathasalihough for o years e us return home, shivaj kept.
quiet.the vit proved that waike ji sigh, avringaeh tsched e value 10 he llace with shivaji.
for him, shivajt was jos 5 petty bhumia aadhoder.
as subsequen devclopments proved, aursngaebs stubbora resrvatons sbout v, refusal to recognae i impor ance sad atiching o low prce o s frend ship, wa one o the biggest poltica mtakes made by avrsagzeh.
fiuat breach wit swavanshiva mnstration xd achevements auriagzeh vrtallygoadedshivaj into resimng his caree of conquest by inising upon a narrow imerprtaion of the treaty of purandar, alibough with the fulure of the expediion apinst bijapur, the bottombad dropped out of the resty.
shways could ok be recomiled 10 the loss of 23 forts and titory wort four lakbs huts 3 year o the ao  mughals withost ssy compensation from bispur.
mo resewed.
the contst i the mughals, scking surat 2 second tme.
1 1670, durng the ext four year,he recovered 8 e mumber o s fots,icludig porandar, from the mughals 1nd made deep taroads nio cspecally bt sad mughal eeiores, sty bijpur,seuring pashal and saars by mesas of i, g e kanis comy st leirs, tn 1674 vy crowned humalf formally at rajgarh st had taveld fr from beinga py jgidar 3t poona.
he wis by now ihe most powetul among the maratha chies, and by viwe ofthe exentof his dom nlons und the 26 of hs army coud chim a status equal o the fte deceam sulsns.
the formal coronstion 1ad, thereloe, a number of parposes.
1t plced him on a edesal mach higher than sy of he maraths chifs, some of whom had contmsed to look vpon by assn upsiart tosrengthen kifwsoculposton furiber, shivai mamed miosome of the leading 0 marath amlesthe molwtes, the shickes, ce.
a formal decarauon was also made by the priest prewding over the funcion, that shivaj was 2 high clsy a5 unindependent rur 1t now became posibefor shivaj 0 ater mto restes wah the doceani sltans on fooing of cqulty and ot 383 rebl.
1 ws lso am importans siep m the frther gromih of maratha nations sesiment.
in 1676 st vnderiook 3 bold sew venture.
withth actnesid and suppers of the srand welcome by the quib swak b m caita ad  formal sgrsement was arcved at.
the quth skah agesd o pay  subady of one kb funs i akhs of rupess szmualy fo shivai d maraths arbasasdor was 1o e at bis cour.
the emriory ad the booty ik was 0 bo shced, the ety was very fevoursble to skvaji sad esabled im0 captre i asd vellore fom biapun offcals 154 40 to conquer mach of the teniooes bed by b balfbrober, exoj altoogh shivaj badasemed the e of haidivedharmoddharal proset.
or of the finds faith he plinderd merci.
oy b hadu population of e s, retursing home laden wih tesure, shva efud 1 share aythng wih the quip shah, s sraining his reations withhu.
the karmtaks expediton was the last majo expediion of shaj the buse st t b op by shivalsproved tobe .
haven ofsfuge fo s son, raaram, durisg avrang.
e slout war 0 he.
maratas, suaji ged in 1680, shorly afer bis i from te karaatala expedin.
mean e, e hed iid the foundation of sound fystem of amintrnion.
shvafls sysem of sdmiiscation was argly borrowed from the adminincative precies of the descant sates.
athough b desgaated ight minisrs, someimes cled the askapradon, it was ot i the sature of  coumil of minisers, ach ministe bing dircly responsbie o the rler the most important minsees wer he pechw who looked after the snances aad general sdminnaton, and the sk nabat senapat which was  post ofhoour 0d was gnerlly ven o one of the lesding maratha i, the majumder wis the sccomnant, whike the wogeerls vas ceponsle for wielgace, ports and.
household affsins.
the surunaris r chinls helped e ing with bis comespem.
dene.
the dobir was maser of ceremonis 0 telped the king i his delings wih foreqn povers.
the nyapediish sad pondiras were i charge of josce tnd.
charitble  e e r cr il erenieme t b ey e bt t t i ey e a eere r e e e t s lri sisomne mukhi system, or that be did not award jagirs t bn ek pri s e et s s e t srr r r clmax and disdtrration of th mughal bmfns2 had become usruly snd sezed the county.
shivijs destroyed.
theis bastons sad.
forced thes to sabm shuves supplmeated s income by levi  contribwion on the oeighbourng mughs temtories.
ths cooteibution which same to oneourh o the land revenue, began fo be calld chasthe onefourh o chauth shivainotonly proved 1o be an abe gene i, s skl tatitan 454 heowd diplomar, e sl the fodation of s strong sate by curbing e power of the deshmkh the srmy.
et an et st of s policics where eapiy of movemeat was he most mportant facor.
the army depended for s slares to s comiderable extent on the plunder of the neighbouring areas.
but the stte cano there by e clld st 0 warat 1t was egional in charaste, o dowst, bat 1t defitely had o popular base.
to that extnt, shivaf was o poplar ang who represaed the aserion of popalsr he aren againsc maghal en ceeachments.
aurangaed aad the decesnistates 165457 it e possile 0 trace thiee phases 10 the elcionsof aurangaeh vich the decani sates.
the st phase usted t1 1668 doring which e main aicmpt was 0 recove from bjspur the tertories belongng to the abmadnagar s suzsodered to 1 by the sty of 1636 b second phase lsted u 1684 durmg which the majr dunge i the deccan was considered 10 the marsthas, and efforts wers made to presurie bispur and gokoonda ato foising bands with the maghals sgaiest shivaj and then aainst s son, sumbh.
siultaneous 1, the mughalsnibled a the teritories of the doccani states whih they tried o bring undr theircomplee domination 464 control.
the lat phasebegan when aurangaeh despair e o geting the.
cooperation of bispur aad golkonda sgaisst the marathas and decded that o destroy the marathas it was oesessary st 0 comqer iapar and goleonds t fusst pruse 165865 the ucaty of 1636 by which sheh jaban hadgiven oneshird of the seritores of abimadnagar stie s o biv for witbdrawng support o the marathas, and promied that the mughals would rever never conquer bijspor 824 golconds, had been sbandoned by shah jaban bimaclt in 165758, goleonda and bijaper were threatened with exncton.
golconda had to pey buge ndemsy, d bjapur had 0 sgre 1o the surrendee of the nizim shahs trotories ranted a 1636, the ustifoation for his was that both these sates had made exensive conguests i k. ataka nd that compensation was dve 1o he moghalson the ground that the two states were moghal vasssh, and that thir con quests had been made posibe doe 0 beaevo oot ceutraly on the past of the mughls.
alio, the cost of maiatsining the mughal armis in the deccan was high, and thencome.
from the decean, areas nder the conteo of the mughal wss insofficent to mest .
fos  g time,the cost was e by sobudes froe e sasries of malws sud gujuat, the resurygion of  pobiey of limecd.
advance 1 e deccon bad arseaching i cations which, 3t seems, nekther shah jaban nor aucsagadb adeauuicy apprciated 1t destroyed tor sl times confdence o the maghal tcsties i promise, snd.
made i posble a wion of hesrts sgumst the ninrathasa paicy which aursegaehs pursed with grea pesevcrace o5  quarie of  century bt with e scess.
on comingtothe hrose, autangash bad w0 problerns in the desean the problen posed by the ring power of shivaf, aad the 2 problems of persusding bospor to pact with the erriare cded 1 1t by the ety of 166, kalyantand bid had been secred .
1657 p was secured by b i 1660, shola pee sl emaned.
however, aurangasis ex pectation thit plced i siuaton,the adi shab wosld wiingly cooperste i he armpegn aganst shivi was varatsic 1 1636, sbah jahan b g bago b 1 the adi sbah o g i sapport agsvat shabji aurang.
225 had notking 1o offer to the adil shah except 1o surrender the gans of 1636, yet, angered by ad shaks attitde of s cospe tion, aurangzehasked jai sinh o pumih both shoaut and adil stk this shows aurangass sonfidence in the superory of e moghal sems 1nd the snderestimation of b opponerts.
but jar smph was n astte pobcue.
he tld aurangaeb, i would be wowie to atck bolh these fols  the same  singh was the only mghal polionn who advocaed an sioutforward polcy nthe deccaa durag ths penod.
jai siagh was of the cpmon hat the marstha problem couldnot be soved without  forward poley n the descans concusion 1o whih astangae fraly camo 20 years whie plsning i invason of bipur, ja siogh bad wren 1o aurangd, the cone quest of bispur s the prefce 10 theconauest of ll dosan and kavastaa.
but aurangzeb nk iom this bold pelicy.
wo can only e at the resons the ruse of lran had adopted threatening atitude in the nerh st the campuign for the conquest of the descan would e ong 41 srduous s3d would e theprescncs ofthe emperor at for arge armies could s be eft i charge of  noble or an ambilous prince s shah jaban had dicoveed 0 bis mufortuse.
but s long s shab jahas wis aive, bow could auraagieh .
afford t0 g0 away on distat campaign wit o i resources, s singhs b pur campgn 1665 was bound o fal.
toe campagn reresied the unted front of tre decteat sses sgainst the moghals, for 1he quib shah sent large fore to aid buapur.
the deceusis adopted il tactics, luring jat smgh on to bjspar whie devstaing the courtryhde so hat the mughals could get 50 supplies ar singh fousd that he bad 00 means o sasalt the ity siace be bad ot brought g gune, and o mvest the city was mmpos bl the retreat proved.costly, nd neiher morey nor any sdditona termory was gamed by il singh by tis chmpuga.
this disppolat ment and the censure of aurangacb bastened jar singis deah 1667 the following year 1668, the mughalssecured the surrader of sholgur by bbery.
the st phase was thos t sceown pruse 166851 the mughets virualy matked ume in the deccan beoween 1668 2nd 1676. a new factor duing the priod was the ris 10 power of madanoa snd akhanoa in gokonds.
these two pifted brothers vitually uied golconda from 1672 almost il the extetion of the st in 1687, the brotbers fllowed a poley of tying o esablia topartite allases be weea golconds, biapur and shivas.
this poliy vas penodicaly disturbed by faction fghts st the bonpur court, and by the ovr weening ambiton of shivaji the facions st bijpar could not be depended upon 10 follow consistnt poly.
they adogiad 4 pro o ants mogha tae depending upon the imme e iteests.
shivei fooed and.atienately supported bijapur aganst the mughals.
al hough serloudy concemmed a1 the roving maratha power, auraagze, it scems, wis keen to nt mughal expansion in.
the decesa.
camay and disitesration 08 the mughal shrire 2 hence, repested effort were made o mstal snd.
back party  b whieh would cooperate i the mughals aganst shaay d which woukd ot e d by goleonda.
in pursut of ths policy.
a seies of mughal ntrvepons were made.
the fest merventon ook place 1 1676, followng he overthrow of the bispur regent khawas knan, whe b agred.to o the mughals aginst s for  prcemiugha hep for the cestrucuon of bis gomentic riva, the afgrans  t mvasion had 1o contead wih the e oppossuon of the byipar snd golconda forces.
altbough the mughals securdpsesson of naldurg and gulbarga by brivery, the basic obeeuve of placng  promoghal andsousmarstha sroup i power could not be resied aursagash now made s new approsch.
the moghalvicero, babadur khan, wt recaled, a0 an afghan nobe and sldr, die kban, who had g0od rlations wichthe aghan ocon i bjapur was placed in command.
dier kban pernded the alghan lender bahiol khaa t0 jom 1n s expeduion agais galeonda.
the golconda roler ad apenly welcomed s 1 i capal, while madanea snd akbanna vr wallyrea the sate.
the filre ofthe mughal biapur atack 1677 was n no small messure duetothe firm leadership of madanms and atbanas the afghan party in bpur was ow ducredied, and an appeal was made 1o qut shah 1o medinte and sav the adi shaky monarchy.
at the mstancs of he qutb shah, i as agreed that s mased, he lder of the descam arty, would become e reget, 04 that wx ki rupees would be pud 0 sid masud 1o pay off the arrars of the afghan sckders who wauld then be dubunded, and that 3 resident trom golconda wosid advse the bijsouri sdmimtration, akhasna i chosen for the pos.
ths marks the igh water mark o hydersbods lence over biapur and b i the plics of the deccan o thetime being, shovsji was nct 8 paty o ths aproement, swvay had anged 10 quib sha by rot sgeeing 10 give bim by share of the spois ofthe karnataka cumpugn.
hemce, ot wa kareataka, he had sonumued s polcy of boundies vilence and ftrgeed 1 s b purm s s sid masad vrot o sive, e ure neghbours we aat the sume sl yo are s deply concened n the welfare of thesate a9 t am.
tho casmy st s, the maghals ace day and mght toyng o rin .
we o osght to unie nd expl the foregner magod also met o mughel chef, diee khan.
as 4 posce offrng, th st of e al shah who was widly especied, vas o mied o marnage 19  son of avmngied, masud 3o promsed o cbey aurangash sad ot to ke any aliance wih shivis.
how ever, news ofthe negotiauions of sid masad wi shoaj eaked out 0 the mugsal who now decided to besege bspur 161 thus, th caly reslt of mughal dplomtic and.
miliary oflorts was te essrua ofhe e fron of the thres decan povers gai the mughals.
the it despersie elort of dier knan 1o captuee bispur 167940 s falled, lurgely bocasse no mughal vieroy bad e means 0 contend sgaistthe umted.
fores of the descam ssts a new lemet which was brought o play was he karnatakt foet sodirs.
thiry howsand of them s by the bead chif, pen naik, were mayor fctorin witbstanding the maghal vege of bigar.
shimsj 00, seat a lage forceto eliee bpar, and raidod the mughal dominiont n a1l dire tons.
thas dier khan coukd chiee nothag excpt layiog mughal teritories open 0 6 maratha raids an b was rcaled by aurzng b, t tmo p 168147 t the mugheh scheved it durg 167630, whea auranesfeched th decean o 1681 i it of b el s, prace kb, b concetatd his torce agut s, e son 404 succemar of sk vil maing reneved o o detach b i goleonda rom the de of the macatias, s dfts .
10t hve n cstcme il o thtof g cartee aforts.
the mt e h ol sld s e mgals, and e dot e wee ot prpered o hrow s o e o e the e e upo the adl shah 21 8 el g0 vl povaans t the mperal ay 1o alow o mgl e s pasge throgh his ariory i o suply  cotngnt o s00 10 00 cumiry o the war st the macwhas, e s gerendd o sar kb, e .
ing bspart o ppesed o the mughas, b cxpled a oper rupare was now et the ag shak appeted fo elp bk to gocond aad sumpaa, which v roupty ghea.
howere, e he combiaed e f the et s coud et wibaand ol arcogt o the moghal sy, par cxlry whenconmanded by the moghs on.
e o i et princ, a0 bad been semonscued ot bva e, 1 took 18 month.
of s, wih avangh o prsonly e dring e sl age, b bispur il 1636, this pronden n smpie sicaion for th e tdure o i sagh 0665, 34 d kiun 167950  campaga gt oiconn s neriable folloving hedowal o bapar.
the s o he qb sha wer 100 mkey 1 b urdon 2 b gen e powe 1o the r nfides, madanaa iod akbanoa, and helped shive on various occsions.
his st trs.
chery wassending 40,000 men to ud bijaper, despie aurangaebs watmags.
n 1685, desp fsaoce, the mughals had occupied gol.
the emperor had agreed to pardon the quth saah m toum for 8 huge subsidy, the ceding of some areas and the owsing of madsuss und akbesoa.
the quib shab oot madaana and akhano were dragged out st the st und murdeced 1656. but cven this srme filed to save the quth shahi monatchy.
after the al of bjspur, aursag.
2sb dededt0 st sores with e qu shab, the sige opened ealy in 168 and after more than sx months of campangning th frt el on account of teschery sad brbry.
aurangasb bad trumpbed bot e soon found that the exunction of bjapur s5d gal conds was nly the begmning of hus dficulves.
the lan aad the most diffclt phsse of auesagashs s began now.
aurssgach, the marathas and the deceanthe lkt phase 16871707 art dowafalof bjapur and goleonds, auraagieb vas able to conceaiate all ny tores againt the marathas.
apartfrom rsid ing burhaapur and aursagabed, the sew maratha king, sambhajt had tbrowa a chal lenge to arangeeh by gng shaltr to s cebls0m, prince akbar.
avringash was mor.
talyafaid that  saly by prince akbar into maghal tertoris,backed wp by the maratkas, mightload 108 ptaacod vl .
however, sumbhal t0ok 3 peculiarly passive attude towards.prince akbar,spending his corgie i futle war with the s on the const sad with the portuguese.prioce akbar chafed and fcted, o even when aursagaed was busy in biswars against bijapur andgoleonda, sembluf efued o give.
aay largescale hlp clriax and disitegration of t mughal bu1re 2 to prince abar.
the prmess dsh o msghal tertey o 1646 was, erefre, caily repaed.
disouraged, prace akbar eicsped oy to lran, 408 sought shelter with the iranan kog evenafe the o biapur and golconds, sembhaf remained smmered i plesure, snd i dealing with e nereal enemies.
in 1689, sumbha was surprsed aths secrl ideost at sangumeshwas by  moghal fore.
he w pirsded before aurangasb and cxeated el and an fnfldl.
ths was undoubredly anotter major potal mistake on the par of aurangreb.
he coud have set asealon his conquest of biapur and gelcosda by coming o terms with the marathas, by execatig sumbhaj, he not el theew away tis hasee, bt provided the marathas o cave.
tn the abience ofa sagl alyag poin,the maratha ardars wero et fee o plunder the maghal tentories dissppeting a the spprosch of the maghal forces.
tnstad of destroying the marathas, autangaeb made the marath oppo iton allpervasne in the decean.
rajaram, he younger brothes of sumbba, wescrovned s ng bt had 0 cscape whea the moghals atacked b cupial rajaram sought sheler atinjon the cast const and consoued.the bght agaiost tho mughale from ther.
ths maratha rsitsce spread from the west o the cast comt.
howeer, for the moment, avrasgeh was at the helgh of ki power, haing triumphed ovee all bis oee.
some of the nobles were of theopinion.
that aurangasb shoud return  dorth ind, leaviag o otbers the task of moppingup operatons agunst the marsthas, taeee was lso en opinicn which, it appears, indthe support of the heirapparen, shah al t e sk of alng over karastaka hould be et t the vasal reers of bispur 804 gokconda.
aurangich refected all thete m suggestions andmprsoned stah alam for daring o segotate with the deccan rulery convinced.
that the maratha pover bad beea crushed, aurangze,afer 1690, concentrated on amnexing t the empue the rich and.
extense kargataks trsct.
however, aurangaeb b of 0re than ke could chew.
he uaduly exended i ies of commuestions which became vl oerable to marath atacks, an neslcted the sk of providing 1 sound adminsration to the seicd ares of biapur and golconda during the pertod between 1690 and 170, aursagzeb subenlyreused to negotate with the marathas.
rajaram was besieged st jis, but the iege proved 1o be ong drswn out.
jis ol fa 1658, but the chiel prize, rajarm, excaped.
mivatha rsstance rew ad the mughals sffered zamber of srius reverses.
the marathas recapired many of ther forts nd rajeram was abie o com back 0 satara.
undusated, auraagzehse out 10w back sl the maratha fote.
for ve ad bl yean, from 1700 to 1705, auragzeb dragaed n weary and ailing body rom the sige of one fort to snothe.
floods, disease snd the martha roving ban took feaful toll of the moghal army.
wearnew sod dflection eadily grew among the nobies and the amy demoraluation e 1 and many jgindacs made secret pacs with the marsthas sad sgreed to pey chawsh i the maruibas did ot disorh i jagi.
in 703, avranges opencd.
negotatons with the marethas.
he wasprepared o rlsse shau, the son of sambia, vho had besn captored s saara slong with s moter, shabu bad been ated wel.
he had boen given the ute of raa snd the mansab of 700077000, on coming of age he fad bean marmed to two maratha girs of respcable fasies,aurasgzeh was prepared 1o prant shabu stvejs swuaiys and e cight of b sodashmah ove the decan, thes recogas.
oa o spocal poslonover 70 marahn rdars actsly asembied 1o rcehe shahu bt aurang caeeled the arangements the t mnut, uacertam abost he tenons of the marathas by 1706, aurngach was comeced of the ftlyof s effort o capue ll the maratha forts.
he slowly rlreted 0 asangibad s axexsing manthasrmy howred round and stscked th singgirs  this whea aurangaeh brethed s st at aurangabad m 1707, b et leind an caice which vas sorely dstrcted, and 17 wlch all e vaous otensl probens of e empiee were omimg 108 hexd dl of th maghal empirsresponsibity of ausagreh the meghal ampro decoed rapdly et desih of auagaeh.
toe meghal ot became the scene for fcton lghomg o the nabes, and soon abitis pro cal goernon besan o bhave in 2 ndepen oot manne, the maratha depredaions xtonded frcm e decan o the besrtand of e cmpire, the gangeve plains,the wak e of the empire s prochived 0 the ord when nedi soah mpraoncd the mughitemperor aad looed dol m 1739 to what exent was the dowatll of he mogha mpes s o dovelopments atier the erath of auragreh, and 10 whatexent was 1t e 1o the mivaien pols adopied by auranget ther has bosn 3 good del of dscumon o0 ths powe smong historns.
t ot auae ol e ry 0 stk o oo f s s m. con ety o ot e .1 acrn i o ot s o t, e i v s i e e e s g i v wik actsbivieg a from oy, okt o s b o viw e i e of o onore, i, simairvs et sl ioaion v gt oy s st deiop ol e, oo 04 dors, e workig of conoms and s fr i s t he g 13 b fly hoos weave .
3 e g e e s s x o .
g e st cstry 1 g st oo wi ke pc wi te rowes s, ths, i tar, coud aly v b mai ponble s prodwcion.
of s h s coton, .
.
g ssianconry.
t e s ettt et the sy of et et ol anied, scrdig o ol nl it tt o evience, tt the ol e snder cokvaton o oo wa ettt work gt e conoen o s a1 the lunisciveplcisprsed by o oghas.
vy ol ven 5 robpous e, was e o i perscu e e e s mproerntof cokvatn, 150 il et of e roweh wer il i e st o ohe aiedrorts bt e miaed rgerimg the v of o o and el e g, a4 t s b aumers 1 h e somer o s  radeand manutcur, 1 el 3 sgrutul broduion wer saganin, o 1,y wee a an disintegration 0f the nughal dnfed act expanding ascapely 35 the stuston tequed this was due to smber o fcors  new mothods of cultvation weee avaiable o soupier the trend of delig prodiction e sl became exhausted.
the liod revenu s e, from akbars e, i s dore o e bl ofth produce, o we.
aclude the hare due 10 the tamindars and o he ober focsl cements.
thovgh the state demand vaned from area o tes, beng e the s el sseas of raeshan and sndh, and more o such forvle s 1 he o prodecing sros 3 kashme, it vas ot gencrlly speak 108, 50 eavy 2 1 drvsthe peasant away from tand, t fue, gares from astern rajusthan show that new villaes wer contmuossly beng tocnded duriog the second halfof the seien tenth and the exdly pat of the aghisenty cestury.
we do not have s for the ol period the besc reasons for umiang expunmon, 1 sppears, were ool snd purtly s, sace e poplion of he country during e period s entmat 12 o, s sy of g communiis, andthe zamindars who oflen elonged o theupper cstes, had e desee or meentive for miking 1t possble for he ntouehables o sele sow wilages and acquire propritory ghis in land they b o ac,  vesed e n keeing hem i  ilags 38 reteve laboar fore, and fo per.
e ak e sandart e vas e hd ot e e, bt o e o .
v e g el demens wis ot ot 1 p e e o .
vt .
e e s of 1o skt 1nd ol st e st .
2 formiag vaious mensl job or them, soch 35 saming tbedead smmas, making eaber fopes, ete.the ural ladles and poce hose who had vey smal boldings hd b the necesary captal nor the rgansation seded for sl new villages or bresking ancol vatsd lunds oa ther own toe st a, sometmes, take the ng 1 sekng rew s but the uatouchables vere a0t sble 1o fake full advanage of ths because e tte had 1o avolve the local zarmdars and villge besden wugaddams n. te coerpre, and they blonged 1o oter case groups and had their own veted iiersts, 35 we have note, wil prodaction mereasedslowty, the demands ad expeciations of he rlig clases sxpanded rapuly.
thus the aumber of man rs o trom 2065 st the tme of shangis accesion .
1605, 0 3000 m 1637 durng shah tuhas rign, and 10 11,456 dusing e e balfof aurangaes rign wi the sumber of nobles rose i s, hereveus resouree ofthe capre dd o mceease i e same proporton, morscve, shah jaban maugurat.
e what may be called an sgs of magufence.
the opulance f the obiss who ey enoy e he ighet salaves 10 che word cresed funter dufingtheperiod though many nobies took part i trade and commerc el or through merchants ctng on the behalt, mcome fom rade and comimerse coud only supplemen thar incoms whh contnaed o be.
maaly from lad.
honce, they tid o icrease thre o from land, secang e of zamindrs and dher lng sandards moghal polcy towars the.
zavaders was contradetory.
while on che one hand, the 2amindas wers conndere the main threst 0 the ntemal sabiiey of the empie, on he ot hand, fforts were made o draw them intoth task o ocal admwimstrtion snd many of themraipots, marathas and otersvere ven manso and politel ofices 1 an ot o broaden e poltcal bas of e cmpre.
the zamindus, who a5 3 cass had become more powertul and sflaental 1 the procss, were in 10 mood 10 submit to the slegal exictions of the obles nor was i exsy to incresse e exaoons on the pessnty sl fothr, especially when there was penty of surpluscaltvable tand and.
the amindaes and the vilage headmen vied with esch otber to 1y t0 atract new euluvatos 1o thr s, the movment of these migrant pesseats called et or upars from villag to wilae n seerch of bettecondiions s file sotieed feature of medieal real 1 thes attenpis to resize more fom the s, ofen by mons ot snctoned by the e, brought 10 the serface al th intermal costrdictions of wediewl sl ssiety.
1t 0 pesant discontent o some ares,upcs 1 led by sindars i vome othet, snd.
atempis o carve out independeat ol kingdoms i il otbecs.
al the adinitrative el 1 1ed 0 groving disistucion 204 fctonslian in the bilty and o the growth of what has been cal the criss of the oidact ystem.
the atempt of the nobies o corner the most proftable uges resulted the mughal admmisratve sysem besomg 1 more comupt.
auruagaeb addedto he i by sl ocresin the lhatise or the trats ceerved for royalexpesss.
this was ret o p s e o o ke was whihwers ot oy b o 2oy e e ot eportn i vheh b i .
sugs we v o e mot e b it o k. vt s of 1 compeen e i of e o, o vou o i e sy, o i o ovad t oty w2l oo sty e by el e of i s o i b it it e 5 ity s e o oyt ol sy plyed o s o o et v e e t g e i, 1 e ok etk iy sl s he ity i of b from ceval au wopped a1 he de f mo ty h iy awat sdd h o, h bl f he moghl sy ot fthe wh e sorn t o sttt v o g i ot o o s o i ty 3 al i ot ot byt ki i 1o ty i, deminion by peoph comis o o it d o s o n has also been argued that the mughal ety ey s v s dvesommli e o il v snd v e st s, e of et e s s s oy, it i i bt onit ooy o g g oy o e sl gy s34 s ornd r e e 5 s b cume i nd .
t ok ik oty of ot o sed e e tndomoga s vt 14 clmay ayd disntegaation of the nughal 1b outiok.
the moghls hnd devieed s carefl ysim of chaks 30d balances a varioss leels i the dmmsrtive machinery a1d wied 10 baance varions ethme snd elgious goups  such a way that the sbitions of indridual nobie of groups of them could be keptunder control, noblesbegan o assume indepenient ars oaly when the sdmiisraiv machisey was allowed todcny by the sccessors of aurasgash and o secount of the seady accenuaton of the cre of the pgrart sem.
thus, ds.
ntegaton wes specded vp not becaste of but 868 st o o breakdown of the mogha ad miitrae syem.
of cours, i can be sud s the mughal sdmisserate syem was highy centralsed 1ad seeded  competeat mesarch o o it in the absene ofsuch moearchs, wass tried 10 a the bl but thy fed.
ths, ndvidual falure and the bresk.
downof thesyter encted o ench othr, in the politcal 8ld, auraagzeb sommted o sumber of senous ik, wo have aready refrred 1o his inabity o understand e e matre of the maratha riovement snd s disregard o jai singhs advie 10 befiend shivai the executon of sambhaj wis snother misake, for it deprived awangab of 3 recopuied marstha head 1o negodiats with, appaseal, aurangzeb had o dese 10 2ego nte wih the marathas he was conviseed hat s the extinction of bispur snd gelconda, he had the maraihas at i mercy and w the marsthas bad 20 opoon bet o accapt b terms s tromcted wraiyt and promise of loyalty and service to the msghtl empercr.
when  auraaped reabied his misake and opened negotlscons with uhe macathas, the demand for cheuthsod sardesh.
ts e e by marh s ot e e s b s p ki proved  serous obvtacle.
even this i been, by and lrge, surmounied.
1 1705, agreedent had ben, more or les arived at, bt auringib could ot bring el o tust shaka and the maratha srdar, 35 we have aurangeh fulod to sove e marutba problm, 2ed this i an open sre.
he 4 e manses tomany marua sriac n fut, marsha sardars hod more momaly st the ighst evels tha the raipus v had.
ve, the marath sardars vese ot trosed.
ul the rayps, thy wer never goen ofies of frus and respoosibity, taus the marattas could ot be imegated into e moghal polital sytem.
here agam,  poliical selcmont with stva,or sumbhajs or shab migt have made o big difeece.
aurungaeb has been crsioned for haviog fld  e with the doccant sates aganst  maraihas, o for having conquerd tem, therehy making the empir sn lacge that it colleed under 1t cun weight a vty of hearts ecween aurasgzeb and the deccasi st was  paychologial imporwilny onee the ey of 1636 vas ssandoned, 3 developmet whic took plac during he e of shah jahen bl after b sesesicn, aurangaeb dessted.
from parsieg a vgorons forward palicy m the decan.
fn fict, he postpone as loug 4 posibl e decion to conquer sad ause the deccand s, aurang.
2cb hand was vituallyfosed by the rowing maratia power, the support exteadod 1o shiaji by madonsa and abane from cickonda, and fear thst bijper might al under he dominaton of stiwji sd the maruhdonimied goloonds.
laer, by e fhelir o e rexl prmes akbar, w sembhai vrtally threw 2 chalioge 10 auongzeh who.
quickly tesised .
the marthar cold ot be doslt witk wibout st subduing bjaper and possbly golconda the stempt o exend mighal admnst on ovee goleonda, byspur and karmiaka, srtehed the mughl ademsaion 0 bresk.
mg poat.
1t also lard mughal les of con mlcaionsopen t marath atscks, 50 such 50, tht the mughal nobie i te s fund.
11 mpomile 1o colket therr dues from the s ssgned to them and someimes made e pcts with te marathas ths, 12 tun, i he powse nd presge of the maraas, ed to dsmoraluston s the nobity, end s bk 1o the mperslprestpe.
perhaps, ruraogeeh mght have been bette advied 0 accpt.
the suggestion.sppareatly pt forward by s eldst son, shah alam, or setmnt with bispar and golconda, ssne caly s past of ther temtones, ard et them rle over karmsisk whoh was fu avey and smc 1o manage the impsct of the decosi and othervars o the mugtal eapire and of the prolonged soricomings of auragi, sch s b excessve suspiciossnes and.
his saow and colt temperamens, the mugbal emprs was sl  powerl snd vigoroos mitary and sdmiitatve machinery.
the meghal amy might al sguast he elave 11d gy mobie buods of marathas i the mountous egion of e deccn, marata tort might be iffct o captere a0d sl more et to fun.
b the plaesofsorhers tnds and.
.
the vast latenexending up 0 the karastka, the muphal arclery vas sl maser o the feld.
thimy o forty years afler avrangchs eath, when the mugha aedry bad decioed consderbly in srengh and eficeny, the marsthascould sllnc fce  m the fed of butl.
contiwous snarchy, wars sadthe depredutons of the mursihas may bave depieed the populaton of the decaan sad brovght 1 rade, mdasty and sgricukurs to 3 wital suadsill.
bot m sorthers tada which was the bear of the empie and was of decisve.
ssonome sad poltcal mportance i e county, the moghal sdminisraton sl rewned mich of s gour, tn fct, the mimiisiaion  the distict level provwed aizingly tenscious 1nd 3 good de of it survmd d fosmd 1 vay indeestly o the b admusiation.
politeally, deprethe miliary reveses and e misakesof aurangze, he moghal dynasy el tmsed  povertl hold on he i sad imaganten of he peopie.
a fir a5 the rapuis are concened, we have een that the breach with marwar vas ot e 1 an atiempi on asrangisbs part o undermine the hindas by depivng them of  recopised hedd, but to  mucalouleton on t art  he wasied 1o dive the marwar state betwcen e twopriccipl clumasts, 22 i the proces aienated bodh, a3 ko the ruler of mewar who.
conndered mughal meceresee 0 soch maters 10 be  dengerousprcedent the reach with mewar and te joxg drawn ot war whih folloned damaged e moral susdng of the moghal sate.
however, e kg was o of much comsequesce tl ariy e 1651 1 may be doubied whetber the presence o rethor raiputs m larger numers 1 the deccan between 1681 snd 1706 would hav made much difireace n tho out gome of the conllct with the maratha.
in any cas,th demands of th rajputs ated to brastof high mansabs s befoe sad rsto raton of thee homelnds.
these demands having been acepied itk alf dosen years la and diintegration of the mcghal eftre2 of aursngaehs deats, the raputs ceased fo be problem for the mghuls.
they played 5o rale m the subsequent dismiegeston of the e, but could s0t srrst the proces of dine aursagzebseeigous polcy should he seen in e vocil, econom sadpoltical canixt.
aurangasb va orthados.in s osiosk and tred tormars within the framevork of the tusoc law.
but this law vas developed outode lodiam vastly dissle stations, nd could hsdiy be appled.
gy to tndia his toiore 1o repect the suscepuilies of now motk subjects on many occasions, hs adherene to the timeworn poliey owirds temples and reipostion of jipah s aid down by the am v dsd 20t help i 10 rally the musims fo i side o senerse grater sase of loyalty owards a ste based o amic luw o the other band, 1 alensied he hindus and sreagthened he s of those sectons which were opposed 0 the mughul empi for polealor lber ressons.
by el 0 eligon vas o poia at e jicyah was scrpped within bl 8 dozen years of avrksg 20 douhs and rostreions on buildag pew templey cosed.
but hse, aain, bad o eflct on the rapdly aceleratng eclive and dsne rsion of the empre o the ulmate msort, the decine and dowstll of the empue was due o cconame, socl, politial snd msttotional fctos.
akbars messoes helped 1o kep the force of drsmtegraton i check for some ume.
butit was smpossible for b to et fupdsmental dhasges ia the strcture of society.
by he time aurangzehcame 0 the hroce, the sosio esonomis forcs of distegeaion were alady ftrong.
aurangaeh lacked the foreight and zatesmamship pecssary o efect fundamental chasges n the strctsre o o pursue polies which could, for the i being, rconcle the various competng lements.
thus ausagasb was both 2 veem of aumstances s2d helped 0 craie the rcums ances of which be became a vitm.
p xercises 1. descnbe the rie of the maratias vades shi.
how fac dud aursogzsh succed inchecking the pover of the marathas 2. descrbe the admnistrtive sytem establihed by shi bulding a strong maratha sat.
3. descebe the min festurs of aurangees policytowards the dectea kigdoms fow fir was inuenced by the seed to check th growth o the maraths power   what were he causes o the foceasing explodation of the pessaatry i the soventeentscentury 5. discass the posation sad sole of the zamindsrs during the g of aursagish.
.
dicuss the mun lings of aurasgzeb how far wee hey responsbe fo the dsinegraton o the mughal empire discus s ol in chapter xix assessment and review t thouad yeursfromthe bgromng ofthe sighth century o the end of the seventeath cestury s mportaatchasges o the polieal, escnome and cultunl ffe of the cosntry and st 0  smallr extnt, s socal b, tathe feldof secal i, th case sysem contied 0 domnste, despe the chalknge pose 10t by siam and koss of poltcal power by the rajput rlers who were duty bourd 0 protct diarma wheh rplied, ameog ot bings, the upholdag of the fourold divsion ofsaiey vamshvemadharme albough the nath panii jogs sad the bhakti saats ehe mently critcsed the case sysem, they could hardly makes dentin .
at sgreement wes arived .
coutse of e thecritcim ofthe caste ssem by st did not.
withsome notable excopuons, extead to dayodsy or seala e, il the bramanas scqpiessd he advocaey ofthe path f devoton a thevway o sabation for all castes, specally for the sudeas.
however, he brabmanas coaimued 0 dam 3 proveged poston for themeives, ncluding the exclsie oght 0 preach and st withia the framework of ute, aew sub roups acose, partly due 0 the absorpticn of bl groups nfo hinduism, party duc o the rowthof new professcaal groups nd parly dneto o tad regomal feclgs.
at the e gime, the varsa satus of castes ros or fell, acsording o thes economic and plcalpower raiputs, maratsas aod khatrs may be mes tioned in ths contet.
the bkt and suf sins gradualy rought about a beter uaderstnding o the fundamest altesets of hindusm and tslam underliniog th fct tht they had geat dealof simlrity ths rsled 1 8 greser spnt.
of mutasl har mony and toleaton,athoogh foress advocat 0 3 nartow, tolrat appcoach contaved to be songy entreached ad someimes fueac ed satepolcies but such eceasons were, 0a the hol, very fw.
the bkt and suf s also brought about mportant changes in the approsch to reipon, laying grater emphass on i fith han 0 he ormal observance.
they alo con tnbeted 10 the growth of regonal aguages and ltesture.
but he xcenive concern wih religous ad spniual alfes resliod .8 et buck 0 te growth of ratiomal scinces, espec ally o the cukivation of siesce 534 tech nology.
on balance,the position of women worsen ed.
seclsion of women or purdah became more wdespread, while hisd women were not able 0 clum th right of remarrage or 1 share 1 ther athes propety which muslim women had.
tn fct these nghs tended o be desied more and more even 10 muslim wommes.
tn the polcal snd economic felds, the most important.
development was the poltal intartion ofthe counry brough about by the ok s lte by the maghals albough te torkioh and mughal sysem o admissraton romaned argly coniaed o sorthera toda, indietly 1 allected ther part of 1ada s the instiution of 8 wellmated cueracy based o sivr, the development of rads 22 saris.
and the prefermce forcity e had  duect it on the gowth of rade s0d hendicals hch reschod s clmax dorng he seventesth comary.
under the mugals, polca negra oa was scompanied by debert ellrt to crate enied g cas conisting of muslns i moo, howeve,the aling o remuoed.
gy srecrtie in characier, wih oaly imted spportnities of caeer wing opea to e peope of tlent rom lower clases.
the moghal nobiy vas ormanaed 35 o buress ercy dependen o0 e mensrch.
howeve, it dered i reome mialy from ands coltveed by peasat propisos.for the collcton of aad revense from pesant, the oy depend e party o s milary folowing 3ad parly o the srsngth of he amindars whose rihts sad.prvieges were defeded 40d marnsined by he ate inreurs forths upporc.
thats why many htoriass argue at the s in medicwl inds remirned sencally fesdal a sgaican conribunon of the turks was e detene of the sountey from mongol soghis dunng the thireents 40d fouricenth contunes.
lasr, for 200 yeurs, the mughals were abe to e the sorhves ot of tndia from freign avasicns.
for is pupose, e pebic of ceatral and west asin were ity followed aad somelmes 51 active part s k. indis reputaton 4 1ad of spices, and o postion 35 the textle masufactoy of the s casters word incuding east a, 1ed the earopean natons 0 tryto xabeh dvet rade elations with todia.while the portsgise onepoly of some fems of s oxeata inde 0 o domation of s kad, onth whole, 2 barmlefec a tnian trad i commerc, b dotch and eeglih raders who broke e portugaese monopoly, heloed 1o open the europesn makets o tnisa prodets ach 4 textles, ndigo aad salpeir wheh were not exported to turcpe care.
thon, it was inked more closy tohe tpidly sxpending eutopean market.
hoveve,n he abense of secure oy a mrginel share of the profs of s e trade.
on the ober and, the rchmes of th orenal trade forther wheted the sppe.
it o the european s and quikened there sconomic and eskaclogeal growth.
siee hey had bardly any commodsie 1o offer which et n demand 13 the oresal workd, xcept the siver and god.
procueed from central a0t souts amena, the europen traders, backed by hergoverames, onght 1 atry 1ato he ernl e of i, o 8 mmber of cccasions, thy deed 10 control tndan tarniores whos meome cold b vid fo the purchase of inan goods as long 55 the mughal empire was szong, the esropess natons e no sccesfl 1 these i obje v, thiadecine of the moghal cmpre 1n mpoctant policalevats i indi durisg the ghteenth centuy such a1 the enry of n st and ite, the afghess, a0 wll 35 the fapd sconomic develepment i the bstopean atioss eding o b indusrisl reviuton, enabied hese mtions o csbink the doms.
natons in tndaas also i masy other avas whi scholars have ied o expan e caums o the docline a0 dowafu of e 26 mghal empe, he ressons why indis, like many oter askn sation, cosld ot develop a5 tapdy s the bsropesn nacons 12 the o o sad wcenific ek, nod furter decaed stady 12d research.
we have shown hat tdians coul not ke ol advantage of grow ng necsations trade doe o 11 weaknes 1 e el feid.
the turkih and mughal roig.
clisesbad 20 tcadtions of conaecion it the e, wik the maghals vere quck 0 reo ke the importascs of do trade snd or at reson, gave paconage and support o the estopean.
trding compunics, they had e dersanding of the impertanc o maval pows e onome devlopaent oo nator.
indas g b the fed o raval powet wa reflecton o 1 rowing bickvard o the e of soase a0d teckoology all tound, even the mechanial clock which buooght togethr l the european iventions i the el of dynamics wa et known in india g he seventeenth cntory the superoity ofthe buropeans in the e of ailerywas el scknoniadged.
evea wher lodan s men et b 0 copy european developenments s o cxample mthe al of stup budiog tl iy fo movate was diplayed, apart from the atide of he ulig s to which e v efred,the ot sretare,horc s5 uradiions wnd the oulook f vazous sectons are mportant s this conext.
there i 125 much cmphass on pust lurng and of shoving defereace 1o those who wer sup posed 10 be e deposiories o thls knowledge zi brabesans and the mollahs abbars ot o moderase the syllabes by inreduc.
more sciene sbjets of secusr erest detated doe 10 the pressne o these emets.
the vry skl ofte tndin arsas axd e avalabity s arge sumber 1l bied th fforts to develop and apply machne.
powet 10 producte enterpres  thus, tdia ged behind the workd m the ek o sciace 1 technology a0d the mughal ruling las remained sioguiarly blind 1o ths gevclopmest, like al rulng claseson theit ey o, the moghal g clas s more concerned with maters of rmmedite concea, aclading 65 creature comfots, han mattes whch would shape the uture despie s, the developmerts in varioss ks i tndia dorng the periodshould not be lostsght of.
the growh of polcal ategra tion vas parailled by cuktural micgrtion.
india soiety was o of he o socetes fa the word which was bl o develop  mere orles vnfed cilture despte sffresces 1 race, rlpon aad langusge.
ths vaifed culire e reflcted s 30 owtbent of crestve activty which makes the seventeesth ceaury a second clasioal sge tn he south, he tradtions of the choia were continsed by the vijys.
maparakopdon.
the babenans kingdon sad i eccasor sttes s ontributed o caltoral evelopments n various felds, the rch turl delopments ia the vanous regomal kingdoms durng the seeth century were, 10 ome cxten, ntgrated in the sewculcl forms devcloped by the mughas.
however, this tegrated ulsee came.
ader presure o the eligious dogmaists of the two farhs a8 vll s from the competng and conllcing teress of various sctons 1 the sug clases, bt thatn survived, on the vhoe, ll fhe e of the mimeteenth century 1 5 mesa ot to all those st choias and enlighiened rles who belped 10 asuon 1. e period wis ko marked.
by ssonomc deropment 2ad growth, trade snd mame.
pucturs cxpanded and thers vas expanson i improvemcat of aluvation o, hoverer the growth wis uneven i diereal steasand durg dffesen phases.
apart from the ganga vally where the moghals speat  subsantal purt of ke revne resouroes of e empire, it whih devioped rapely dring he mandsl coust and beagal.
perkaps, 1t i o sedent o hevs e b the areas tortron of conome devlopasat of indi in e edern period, pareuialy the.
post incependeace en.
woud tadia have contnued o progress sconomeally and even atined.
tndustrl re sotstion on 6 ows, if the moghal cmpir had contiued 1 the question is t00 spesulative.
e dvelopiment of th souniry.
dut whether tudia was 3ble o develop fuser sad 1  mre armonious maaner under brah ke auesson whch wil bo.ssumined fn the sobssquent volume on modern tadn.
exercises pecod.
2 what were the most important contribuons o the bhaki sad .
whst were the mais politeal schievements of he turknh sutsss nd maghal ampecors  the chinges that took pluce in tndins socety dorng the medievsl i1  drsus the comsequences of tadis bickwardness i the feid of siencesad technology in the madieval pericd.
appendic mughal empire  1605 o s asshm soms e e vht k  asr o seneal