modern india editorial board chief editor dr. s. gopal editors dr. s. nurul hasan dr. satish chandra dr. romila thapar secretary dr. k. maitra modern india bipan chandra digitised by ekvakra national council of educational research and training first published june 1971 jyaistha 1893 repi inted september 1976 bhadra 1898 may 1977 vaisakha 1899 may 1980 vaisakha 1902 june 1981 jyaistha 1903 april 1982 chaitia 1904 p.d.
22 tdpg r  national council of educational research and training, 1971 price rs 6.90 published at the publication department by v k fandtt, secretary, national council of educational research and training, sri aurobmdo marg, new delhi 110016, and printed at india offset press, a1 mayapuri, new delhi 110064 preface this book deals with, the modern period of indian history.
effort has been made in this book to lay emphasis on forces, movements and institutions rather than on military and diplomatic events and on individual administrators and political leaders.
the 18th century society, economy and political system have been discussed at length in order to indicate the social situation which enabled a company of foreign merchants to conquer this vast land.
the nature and character of british imperialism, its impact on the social, economic and administrative life of india, and the indian response have also been dealt with in detail.
finaljy,the strengthening of the idea of nationhood in the country and the development of a countrywide struggle against foreign rule, culminating in the attainment of independence, is studied.
an attempt has also been made to place events in their world setting.
the board of editors is grateful to dr. bipan chandra for undertaking the writing of this book.
the board has gone through the text carefully and accepts full responsibility for the final version.
contents chapter i the decline of the mughal empire chapter ii indian states and society in the 18th century ., chapter iii the beginnings of european settlements chapter iv the british conquest of india cmaptir v the struclurc of the government and the economic policies of the british empire in india, 17571857 chapter vi administrative organisation and social and cultural policy chapter vii social and cultural awakening in the first half of the 19th century chapter viii  the revolt of 1857 chapter ix administrative changes after 1838 chapter x india and her neighbours chapter xi economic impact of the british rule chapter xji growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 chapter xiii growth of new india religious and social reform after 1858 chapter xiv nationalist movement 19051918 chapter xv struggle for swaraj the decline of the mughal empire he great mughal empire, the envy of its contemporaries, for almost two centuries, declined and disintegrated during the first hair of the 18th century.
the mughal emperors lost their power and glory and their empire shrank to a few square miles around delhi.
in the end, in 1803, delhi itself was occupied by the british array and the proud mughal emperor was reduced to the status of a mere pensioner of a foreign power.
a study of the process of decline of this great empire is most instructive.
it reveals some of the defects and weaknesses of indias medieval social, economic and political structure which were responsible for the eventual subjugation of the country by the english east india company.
the unity and stability of the empire had been shaken up during the long and strong reign of aurangzeb yet in spile of his many harmful policies, the mughal administration was still quite efficient and the mughal army quite strong at the time, of his death in 1707. moreover, the mughal dynasty still commanded respect in the country.
on aurangzebs death his three sons fought among themselves for the throne the 65year old bahadur shah emerged victorious.
he was learned, dignified, and able.
he followed a policy of compromise and conciliation, and there was evidence of the reversal of some of the narrowminded policies and measures adopted by aurangzeb.
he adopted a more tolerant attitude towards the hindu chiefs and rajas.
there was no destruction of temples in his reign, in the beginning, he made an attempt to gain greater control over the rajput states of amber and marwar jodhpur by replacing jai singh by his younger brother vijai singh at amber and by forcing ajit singh of marwar to submit to mughal authority.
he also made an attempt to garrison the cities of amber and jodhpur.
this attempt was, however, met with firnj resistance.
this may have made him recognisc the folly of his actions for he soon arrived at a settlement with the two states, though the settlement was not magnanimous.
though their states were restored to the rajas jai singh and ajit singh, their demand for high matisabs and the offices of sitbahdars of important provinces such as malwa and gujarat was not accepted.
his policy towards the maratha sardars chiefs was that of half hearted conciliation.
t 2 modern india while he granted them the sardeshmukhi of the deccan, he failed to grant them the chauth and thus to satisfy them fully.
he also did not recognise shahu as the rightful maratha king.
he thus let tara bai and shahu tight for supremacy over the maratha kingdom.
the result was that shahu and the maratha sardars remained dissatisfied and the deccan continued to be a prey to disorder.
there could be no restoration of peace and order so long as the maratha sardars fought one another as well as fought against the mughal authority.
bahadur shah had tried to conciliate the rebellious sikhs by making peace with guru go bind singh and giving him a high mansab rank, but when, after the death of the guru, the sikhs once again raised the banner of revolt m the punjab under the leadership of banda bahadur, the emperor decided to take strong measures and himself led a campaign against the rebels, who soon controlled practically the entire territory between the sutlej and the jamuna, reaching the close neighbourhood of delhi.
even though he succeeded in capturing lohgarh, a fort built by guru gobind singh northeast of ambala at the foothills of the himalayas, and other important sikh strongholds, the sikhs could not be crushed and in 1712 they recovered the fort of lohgarh.
bahadur shah conciliated c ha tarsal, the bundela chief, who remained a loyal feudatory, and the jat chief churaman, who joined him in the campaign against banda bahadur.
there was further deterioration in the field of administration in bahadur shahs reign.
the position of state finances worsened as a result of his reckless grants of jagirs and promotions.
during his reign the remnants of the royal treasure, amounting in 1707 to some 13 crores of rupees, were exhausted.
bahadur shah was groping towards a solution of the problems besetting the empiie.
given time, he might have revived the imperial fortunes.
unfortunately, his death in 1712 plunged the empire once again into civil war.
a new element entered mughal politics in this and the succeeding wars of succession.
while previously the contest for power had been between royal princes, and the nobles had merely aided the aspirants to the throne, now ambitious nobles became direct contenders for power and used princes as mere pawns to capttire the seats of authority.
in the civil war following bahadur shahs death, one of his less able sons, jahandar shah, won because he was supported by zulfiqar khan, the most powerful noble of the time.
jahandar shah was a weak and degenerate prince who was wholly devoted to pleasure.
he lacked good manners and dignity and decency.
during jahandar shahs reign, the administration was virtually in the hands of the extremely capable and energetic zulfiqar khan, who had become his wazir.
zulfiqar khan believed that it was necessary to establish friendly relations with the rajput rajas and the maratha sardars and to conciliate the hindu chieftains in general in order to strengthen his own position at the court and to save the empire.
therefore, he rapidly reversed the policies of aurangzeb the hated jizyah was abolished.
jai singh of amber was given the title of mirza raja sawai and appointed governor of malwa ajit singh of marwar was awarded the title of maharaja and appointed the decline op the mughal empire 3 governor of gujarat.
zulfiqar khan confirmed the earlier private arrangement that his deputy in the deccan, daud khan panni, had concluded with the maratha king shahu in 1711 by this arrangement, the maratha ruler was granted the chmah and xardeshmtkln of the deccan on the condition that these collections would be made by the mughal officials and then handed over to the maralha officials.
zulfiqar khan also conciliated churaman jat and chhatarsal bundela.
only towards banda and the sikhs he continued the old policy of suppression zulfiqar khan made an attempt to improve the finances of the empire by checking the reckless growth of jagirs and offices.
he also tried to compel the mansabdars nobles to maintain their official quota of troops.
an evil tendency encouraged by him was that of jar ah or revenuefarming.
instead of collecting land revenue at a fixed rate as under todar mais land revenue settlement, the government began to contract with revenue farmers and middlemen to pay the government a fixed amount of money while they were left free to collect whatever thay could from the peasant.
this led to increased oppression, of the peasant.
many jealous nobles secretly worked against zulfiqar khan.
worse still, the emperor too did not give him his trust and cooperation in full measure.
the emperors ears were poisoned against zulfiqar khan by unscrupulous favourites.
he was told that his wazir was becoming too powerful and ambitious and might even overthrow the emperor himself.
the cowardly emperor dared not dismiss the powerful wazir, but he began to intrigue against him secretly.
nothing could have been more destructive of heallhy administration.
jahandar shahs inglorious reign came to an early end in january 1713 when he was defeated at agra farrukh siyar, his nephew.
farrukh siyar owed his victory to the saiyid brothers, abdullah khan and husain all khan baraha, who were therefore given the offices of wazir and mtr bakshi respectively the two brothers soon acquired dominant control over tnc affairs of the state.
farrukh siyar lacked the capacity to rule.
he was cowardly, cruel, undependable and faithless.
moreover, he allowed himself to be influenced by worthless favourites and flatterers.
in spite of his weaknesses, farrukh siyar was not willing to give the saiyid brothers a free hand but wanted to exercise personal authority.
on the other liand, the saiyid brothers were convinced that administration could be carried on properly, the decay of the empire checked, and their own position safeguarded only if they wielded real authority and the emperor merely reigned without ruling.
thus there ensued a prolonged struggle for power between the emperor farrukh siyar and his wazir and mir iakshi.
year after year the ungrateful emperor intrigued to overthrow the two brothers year after year, he failed.
in the end, in 1719, the saiyid brothers deposed him and killed him.
in his place they raised to the throne in quick succession two young princes who died of consumption.
the saiyid brothers now made the 18year old muhammad shah the emperor of india.
the three successors of farrukh siyar were mere puppets in the hands of the saiyids.
even their personal liberty to meet people and to move around was 4 modern india restricted.
thus, from 1713 until 1720, when they were overthrown, the saiyidbrothers wielded the administrative power of the state.
the saiyid brothers adopted the policy of religious tolerance.
they believed that india could be ruled harmoniously only by associating hindu chiefs and nobles with the muslim nobles in governing the country.
again, they sought to conciliate and use the rajputs, the marathas, and the jats in their struggle against farrukh siyar and the rival nobles.
they abolished the jizyah immediately after farrukh siyars accession to the throne.
similarly, the pilgrim tax was abolished from a number of places.
they won over to their side ajit singh of marwar, jai singh of amber, and many other rajput princes by giving them high positions of influence in the administration.
they made an alliance with churaman, the jat chieftain.
in the later years of their administration they reached an agreement with king shahu by granting him the swarajya of shivaji and the right to collect the chauth and sardeshmukhi of the six provinces of the deccan.
in return, shahu agreed to support them in the deccan with 15,000 mounted soldiers.
the saiyid brothers made a vigorous effort to contain rebellions and to save the empire from administrative disintegration.
they failed in these tasks mainly because they were faced with constant political rivalry, quarrels, and conspiracies at the court.
this continued friction in the ruling circles disorganised and even paralysed administration at all levels.
lawlessness and disorder spread everywhere.
the financial position of the state deteriorated rapidly as zamindars and rebellious elements refused to pay land revenue, officials misappropriated state revenues, and central income declined because of the spread of revenue farming.
as a result, the salaries of the officials and soldiers could not be paid regularly and the soldiers became indisciplined and even mutinous.
even though the saiyid brothers had tried hard to conciliate and befriend all sections or the nobility, a powerful group of nobles headed by nizamulmulk and his fatheis cousin muhammad amin khan began to conspire against them.
these nobles were jealous of the growing power of the two brothers.
the deposition and murder of farrukh siyar frightened many of them if the emperor could be, killed, what safety was there for mere nobles moreover, the murder of the emperor created a wave of public revulsion against the two brothers.
they were looked down upon as traitors persons who had not been true to their salt namak haram.
many of the nobles of aurangzebs reign also disliked the saiyid alliance with the rajput and the maratha chicfs and their liberal policy towards the hindus.
these nobles declared that the saiyids were following antimughal and antiislamic policies.
they thus tried to arouse the fanatical sections of the muslim, nobility against the saiyid brothers.
the antisaiyid nobles were supported by emperor muhammad shah who wanted to free himself from the control of the two brothers.
in 1720, they succeeded in treacherously assassinating husain ai khan, the younger of the two brothers.
abdullah khan tried to fight back but was defeated near agra.
thus ended the domination of the mughal empire by the saiyid brothers known in indian history as king makers.
the decline op the mughal empire 5 muhammad shahs long reign of nearly 30 years 17191748 was the last chance of saving the empire there wcie no quick changes of imperial authority as in the period 17071720. when his reign began mughal prestige among the people was still an important political factor.
the mughal army and particularly the mughal artillery was still a force to reckon with.
administration in northern india had deteriorated but not broken down yet.
the maratha sanlais were still confined to the south, while the rajput rajas continued to be loyal to the mughal dynasty.
a strong and farsighted ruler supported by a nobility conscious of its peril might still have saved the situation.
but jvluhammad shah was not the man of the moment.
he was weakminded and frivolous and over fond of a life of ease and luxury.
hs neglected the affairs of state.
instead of giving full support to able ivazhs such as nizamulmulk, he fell under the evil influence of corrupt and worthless flatterers and intrigued against his own ministers.
he even shared in the bribes taken by his favourite courtiers.
disgusted with the ficklemindedness and suspicious nature of the emperor and the constant quarrels at the court, nizumulmulk, the most powerful noble of the time, decided to follow his own1 ambition.
he had become the wazir in 1722 and had made a vigorous attempt to reform the administration.
he now decided to leave the emperor and his empire to their fate and to strike out on his own.
he relinquished his office in october 1724 and marched south to found the state of hyderabad in the deccan.
his departure was symbolic of the flight of loyalty and virtue from the empire.
the physical breakup of the mughal empire had begun.
the other powerful and ambitious nobles also now began to utilise their energies for carving out semiindependent states.
hereditary nawabs owing nominal allegiance to the emperor at delhi arose in many parts of the country, for example, in bengal, hyderabad, avadh, and the punjab.
everywhere petty zamindars, rajas and nawabs raised tht banner of rebellion and independence.
the marathi sardars began their northern expansion and overran malwa, gujarat and bundelkhand, then, in 17381739, nadir shah descended upon the plains of northern india, and the empire lay prostrate.
nadir shah had risen from shepherd boy to shah king by saving persia from sure decline and disintegration.
in the beginning of the 18th century persia, hitherto a powerful and far flung empire, was under the weak rule of the declining safavi dynasty.
it was threatened by internal rebellions and foreign attacks.
in the east, the abdali tribesmen revolted and occupied herat, and the ghalzai tribesmen detatched the province of qandahar.
similar revolts occurred m the north and west.
in shir van, religious persecution of the sunnis by fanatical shias led to rebellion.
here, swm mullahs were put to death, mosques were profaned and turned into stables, and religious works were destroyed.
in 1721, the ghalzai chief of qandahar, mahmud, invaded persia and occupied isfahan, the capital.
russia under peter the great was determined to push southward.
peter began his invasion of persia in july 1722 and soon forced persia to sign away several of her provinces on the caspian sea, including the town of baku, turkey, deprived of most of her european possessions, also hoped to make good the loss at persias cost.
in the spring of 1723, turkey declared war on persia and rapidly pushed 6 modern india through georgia and then penetrated south.
in june 1724, russia and turkey signed a treaty dividing all northern and most of western persia between them.
at this stage, in 1726, nadir emerged as a major supporter of tahmsap and as his most brilliant commander.
in 1729 he won back herat after defeating the abdalis and expelled the ghalzais from isfahan and central and southern persia.
after long and bitter warfare he compelled turkey to give back all conquered territory.
in 1735, he signed a treaty with russia receiving back all seized territory.
next year, he deposed the last of the safavi rulers and made himself the shah.
in the following years, he reconquered the province of qandahar.
nadir shah was attracted to india by the fabulous wealth for which it was always famous.
continual campaigns had made persia virtually bankrupt.
money was needed desperately to maintain his mercenary army.
spoils from india could be a solution.
at the same time, the visible weakness of the mughal empire made such spoliation possible.
he entered indian territory towards the end of 1738, without meeting with any opposition.
for years the defences of the northwest frontier had been neglected.
the danger was not fully recognised till the enemy had occupied lahore.
hurried preparations were then made for the defence of delhi, but the factionndden nobles refused to unite even in sight of the enemy, they could not agree on a plan for defence or on the commander of the defending forces.
disunity, poor leadership, and mutual jealousies and distrust could lead only to defeat.
the two armies rret at karnal on 13th february 1739 and the invader inflicted a crushing defeat on the mughal army.
the emperor muhammad shah was taken prisoner and nadir shah marched on to delhi.
a terrible massacre of the citizens of the imperial capital was ordered by nadir shah as a reprisal against the killing of some of his soldiers.
the greedy invader took possession of the royal treasury and other royal property, levied tribute on the leading nobles, and plundered the rich of delhi.
his total plunder has been estimated at 70 crores of rupees.
this enabled him to exempt his own kingdom from taxation for three years he also carried away the famous kohinur diamond and the jewelstudded peacock throne of shahjahan.
he compelled muhammad shah to cede to him all the provinces of the empire west of the river indus.
nadir shahs invasion inflicted immense damage on the mughal empire.
it caused an irreparable loss of prestige and exposed the hidden weakness of the empire to the maratha sardars and the foreign trading companies.
the central administration was thoroughly paralysed temporarily.
the invasion ruined imperial finances and adversely affected the economic life of the country.
the impoverished nobles began to rackrent and oppress the peasantry even more m an effort to recover i heir lost fortunes.
they also fought one another over rich jagirs and high offices more desperately than ever.
the loss of kabul and the areas to the west of the indus once again opened the empire to the threat of invasions from the northwest.
a vital line of defence had disappeared.
it is surprising indeed that the empire seemed to revive some of its strength after nadir shahs departure, even though the area under its effective control shrank rapidly.
but the revival was deceptive and superficial.
after muhammad the decline op the mughal empire 7 shahs death in 1748, bitter struggles and even civil war toroke out among unscrupulous and power hungry nobles.
furthermore, as a result of the weakening of the northwestern defences, the empire was devastated by the repeated invasions of ahmed shah abdali, one of nadir shahs ablest generals, who had succeeded m establishing his authority over afghanistan after his masters death.
abdali repeatedly invaded and plundered northern india right down to delhi and mathura between 1748 and 1767. in 1761, he defeated the marathas in the third battle of panipat and thus gave a big blow to their ambition of controlling the mughal emperor and thereby dominating the country, he did not, however, found a new afghan kingdom in india.
he and his successors could not even retain the punjab which they soon lost to the sikh chiefs.
as a result of the invasions of nadir shah and abdali and the suicidal internal feuds of the mughal nobility, the mughal empire had by 1761 ceased to exist in practice as an allindia empire.
it remained merely as the kingdom of delhi.
delhi itself was a scene of daily not and tumult.
the descendants of the grand mughals no longer participated actively in the struggle for the empire of india, but the various contenders for power found it politically useful to hide behind their name.
this gave to the mughal dynasty a long lease oc life on the nominal throne of delhi.
shah alam ii, who ascended the throne in 1759, spent the initial years as an emperor wandering from place to place far away from his capital, for he lived in mortal fear of his own waztr.
he was a man of some ability and ample courage.
but the empire was by now beyond redemption.
in 1764, he joined mir qasim of bengal and shujauddaula of avadh in declaring war upon the english east india company.
defeated by the british at the battle of buxar, he lived for several years at allahabad as a pensioner of the east india company, he left the british shelter in 1772 and returned to delhi under the protective arm of the marathas.
the british occupied delhi in 1803 and from that year till 1857, when the mughal dynasty was finally extinguished, the mughal emperors merely served as a political front for the english.
in fact, the continuation of the mughal monarchy after 1759, when it had ceased to be a military power, was due to the poweiful hold that the mughal dynasty had on the minds of the people of india as the symbol of the political unity of the country.
causes of the decline of the mughal empire when a mighty empire like lhat of the great mughals decays and falls it is because many factois and forces have been at work.
the beginnings of the decline of the mughal empire are to be traced to the strong rule of aurangzeb.
aurangzeb inherited a large empire, yet he adopted a policy of extending it further to the farthest geographical limits in the south at great expense in men and materials.
tn reality, the existing means of communication and the economic and political structure of the country made it difficult to establish a stable centralised administration over all parts of the country thus aurangzebs objective of unifying the entire country under one central political authority was, though justifiable in theory, not easy in practice.
one of the basic failures of aurangzeb lay in the realm of statesmanship.
he 8 modern india was not willing to accept to the full the maratha demand for regional autonomy, failing to grasp the fact that shivaji and other maratha sardars represented forces which could not be easily crushed.
akbar, placed in similar circumstances, had made an alliance with the rajput princes and chiefs.
aurangzeb too would have been welladvised to win over the maratha sardars.
instead, he chose to suppress them.
his futile but arduous campaign against the marathas extended over many years it drained the resources of his empire and ruined the trade aad industry of the deccan.
his absence from the north for over 25 years and his failure to subdue the marathas led to deterioration in administration  this undermined the prestige of the empire and its army, led to the neglect of the vital northwest frontier, and encouraged provincial and local officials to defy central authority and to dream of independence.
later, in the 18th century, maiatha expansion in the north weakened central authority still further.
aurangzebs.
conflict with some of the rajput states also had serious consequences.
alliance with the rajput rajas with the consequent military support was one of the main pillars of mughal strength m the past.
aurang7b himself had in the beginning adhered to the rajput alliance by raising jaswant singh of marwar and jai singh of amber to the highest of ranks, but his short sighted attempt later to reduce the strength of the raj put raj as and to reextend imperial sway over their lands led to the withdrawal of their loyalty from the mughal throne.
wars with the rajput rajas further weakened the empire and encouraged separation.
in particular they tended to create a wall between the hindu and the muslim upper classes.
the strength of aurangzebs administration was challenged at its very nerve centre around delhi by the satnami, the jat, and the sikh uprisings.
even though the number of people involved in these uprisings was not large, they were significant because they were popular in character peasants formed their backbone.
ah of them were to a considerable extent the result of the oppression of the mughal revenue officials over the peasantry.
they showed that the peasantry was deeply dissatisfied with feudal oppression by zamindars, nobles, and the state, aurangzebs religious orthodoxy and his policy towards the hindu rulers seriously damaged the stability of the mughal empire.
the mughal state in the days of akbar, jahangir, and shahjahan was basically a secular state.
its stability was essentially founded on the policy of noninterference with the religious beliefs and customs of the people, fostering of friendly relations between hindus and muslims, opening the doors of the highest offices of the state to nobles and chiefs belonging to different regions and professing different religions.
the mughal alliance with the rajput rajas was a visible manifestation of this policy.
aurangzeb made an attempt to reverse this policy by imposing the jizyah, destroying many of the hindu temples in the north, and putting certain restrictions on the hindus.
la this way he tended to alienate the hindus, split mughal society and, in particular, to widen the gulf between the hindu and muslim upper glasses.
but the role of the religious policy of aurangzeb m causing the decay of mughal power should not be overstressed.
this the decline op the mughal empire 9 policy was followed only m the latter part of his reign.
it was speedily abandoned by his successors.
as we have seen earlier, the jizyah was abolished within a few years of aurangzebs death.
amicable relations with the rajput and other hindu nobles and chiefs were soon restored and some of them such as ajit singh rathor and jai singh sawai rose to high officer under the later mughals relations with king shahu and the maratha sardars were also developed along political rather than religious lines.
it should also be kept in view that the rajput, jat, maratha, and sikh chieftains of the 18th century also did not behave as champions of the hindus.
power and plunder were more important considerations to them than religious solidarity they were often as ruthless in fighting and looting the hindus as the muslims.
in fact, neither the hindus nor the muslims formed a homogenous community at that time.
the upper classes of both the religious groups formed the ruling class while the peasants and artisans, hindu or muslim, formed the underprivileged majority of society.
sometimes the hindu and muslim nobles and chiefs used religion as a weapon of propaganda to achieve their political aims.
but even more often they formed mutual alliances against fellow coreligionists for gaining power, territory, or money.
moreover, both the hindu and the muslim nobles, zamindars, and chiefs ruthlessly oppressed and exploited the common people irrespective of their religion the hindu peasantry of maharashtra or rajputana paid as high an amount in land revenue as did the hindu or muslim peasantry m agra or bengal or avadh.
moreover, cordial cultural and social relations prevailed between the hindu and muslim upper classes of india.
if aurangzeb left the empire with many problems unsolved, the situation was further worsened by the ruinous wars of succession which followed his death.
in the absence of any fixed rule of succession, the mughal dynasty was always plagued after the death of a king by a civil war between the princes these wars of succession became extremely fierce and destructive during the 18th century.
they resulted in great loss of life and property.
thousands of trained soldiers and hundreds of capable military commanders and efficient and tried officials wee killed.
moreover, these civil wars loosened the administrative fabric of the empire.
the nobility, the backbone of the empire, was transformed into warring factions.
many of the local chiefs and officials utilised the conditions of uncertainty, and political chaos at the centre to consolidate their own position, to acquire greater autonomy, and to make their offices hereditary.
the weaknesses of aurangzebs reign and the evils of the wars of succession might still have been overcome if able, farsighted, and energetic rulers had appeared on the throne.
unfortunately, after bahadur shahs brief reign came a long reign of utterly worthless, weakwilled and luxury loving kings.
after all, in an autocratic, monarchical system of government, the character and personality of the ruler do play a crucial role.
at the same time, this single factor need not be given too much importance.
aurangzeb was neither weak nor degenerate.
he possessed great ability and capacity for work.
he was free of vices common among kings and lived a simple and austere life.
he undermined the great empire of his forefathers not because he lacked character or ability but because he lacked political, social and economic insight.
it was not his 10 modern india personality but his policies that were out of joint.
apart from the personalities of the great mughals, the strength of the mughal empire lay in the organisation and character of its nobility.
the weakness of the king could have been successfully overcome and covered up by ah alert, efficient, and loyal nobility.
but he character of the nobility had also deteriorated.
many nobles lived extravagantly and beyond their means.
many of them became easeloving and fond of excessive luxury.
even when they went out to fight they surrounded themselves with comforts and frequently took their families with them.
they were often poorly educated.
many of them neglected even the art of lighting.
earlier, many able persons from the lower classes had been able to rise to the ranks of nobility, thus infusing fresh blood into it.
later, the existing families of nobles began to monopolise all offices, barring the way to fresh comers.
not all the nobles, however, had become weak and inefficient.
a large number of energetic and able officials and brave and brilliant military commanders came into prominence during the 18th century, but most of them did not benefit the empire because they used their talents to promote their own interests and to fight each other rather than to serve the state and society.
in fact, contrary to the popular belief, the major weakness of the mughal nobility during the 18th century lay, not in the decline in the average ability of the nobles or their moral decay, but in their selfishness and lack of devotion to the state and this, in turn, gave birth to corruption in administration and mutual bickering.
in order to increase their power, prestige, and income, the nobles formed groups and factions against each other and even against the king.
in their struggle for power they took recourse to force, fraud, and treachery.
their mutual quarrels exhausted the empire, affected its cohesion, led to its dismemberment, and, in the end, made it an easy prey to foreign conquerors.
and the most guilty in this respect were precisely those nobles who were active and able.
it is they who shattered the unity of the empire by carving out their own private principalities.
thus, the decadence of the later mughal nobility lay not so much in private vice as in lack of public virtue and political foresight and in its devotion to the shortsighted pursuit of power.
but these characteristics were not the monopoly of the mughal nobility at the centre.
they were found in equal measure among the rising maratha chiefs, the rajput rajas, the jat, the sikh, and the bundela chiefs, the new rulers of autonomous provinces, and the other innumerable adventurers who rose to fame and power during the troubled 18th century.
one of the major causes of the growing selfishness and cliquishness of the nobles was the paucity of jagirs and the reduced income of the existing jagirs at a time when the number of nobles and their expenditure was going up so there ensued intense mutual rivalry among them for the possession of the existing jagirs.
the heart of the matter perhaps was that no arrangement could have been made wluch would satisfy all the nobles, for there were just not enough offices and jagirs for all.
the paucity of jagirs had some other consequences.
the nobles tried to get the maximum income from their jagirs at the cost of the peasantry.
they tried to transform their existing jagirs and offices into hereditary ones to balance their own budgets they tended to the decline op the mughal empire 11 appropriate khalisah crown lands, thus intensifying the financial crisis of the central government.
they invariably reduccd their expenditure by not maintaining their full quota of troops ind thus weakened the armed strength of the empire a basic cause of the downfall of the mughal empire was that it could no longer satisfy the minimum needs of its population the condition of the indian peasant gradually worsened during the 17th and 18th centuries.
while at no time perhaps was liis lot happy, in the 18th century his life, was poor, nasty, miserable and uncertain.
the burden of land revenue went on increasing from akbars time.
moreover, constant transfer ol nobles from their jagirs also led to great evil.
they tried to extract as much from a jagir as possible in the short period of their tenure as jagirdars.
they made heavy demands on the peasants and cruelly oppressed them, often in violation of official regulations.
after the death of aurangzeb, the practice of ijarah or farming the land revenue to the highest bidder, who was permitted to raise what he could from the peasantry, became more common both on jagir and khahsah crown lands.
this led to ihe rise of a new class of revenue farmers and talukdars whose extortions from the peasantry often knew no bounds.
all these factors led to stagnation and deterioration in agriculture and the impoverishment of the peasant.
peasant discontent increased and came to the surface.
there are some instances of the peasants leaving the land to avoid paying taxes.
peasant discontent also found an outlet in a series of uprisings the satnamies, the jats, the sikhs, etc.
which eroded the stability and strength of the empite.
many ruined peasants formed roving bands of robbers and adventurers, often under the leadership of the zamindars, and thus undermined law and order and the efficiency of the mughal administration.
as a matter of fact, agriculture was no longer producing enough surplus to meet the needs of the empire, of constant warfare, and of the increased luxury of the tuhng classes.
if the empire was to survive and regain its strength and if the people were to go forward, trade and industry alone could provide the additional economic resources.
but it was precisely in trade and industry that stagnation was most evident.
no r doubt the establishment of a large empire encouraged trade and industry in many ways and indias industrial production increased to a marked extent.
both in the quality of its products and their quantity, indian industry was quite advanced by contemporary world standards.
but unlike jn europe at this time, indian industry did not make any new advances in science and technology.
similarly, the growth of trade was hampered by bad communications and by the selfsufficient nature of village economy.
moreover, emphasis on land as a source of wealth and government revenue led to the neglect of overseas trade and the navy.
perhaps nt even the best of kings and nobles could have changed this situation.
in the absence of scientific and technological development and a social, economic and political revolution, india lagged behind europe economically and politically and succumbed to its pressure.
an important sociopolitical cause of the downfal of the mughal empire was the absence of the spirit of political nationalism among the people.
this 12 modern india was because india at the time lacked the elements which constitute a modern nation, the people of india did not feel that they were all indians, nor were they conscious of oneness or of having common interests, even though elements of cultural unity had existed in the country for centuries.
therefore, there did not exist the ideal of living and dying for ones nation.
instead people were loyal to persons, tribes, castes, and religious sects.
in fact no group or class in the country was deeply interested in maintaining the unity of the country or the empire.
such unity as did exist was imposed from above by strong rulers.
the peasants loyalty was confined to their village and caste.
moreover, they took little interest in the politics of the empire nor did they identify its interests with their own.
they realised that they had little stake in it and that even its defence from external aggression was not their concern.
the zamindars tended to rebel against any central authority which showed signs of weakness.
they were opposed to a strong, centralised state that curbed their power and autonomy.
the nobles had been earlier imbued with the exalted notion of loyalty to their dynasty.
but this was mainly based on the high offices and privileges they obtained in return.
with the decline of the dynasty, the nobles placed their stlfi nterest and ambition above loyalty to the state and attacked the very unity of the empire by carving out autonomous principalities.
even those who rebelled against the empire, for example, the marathas, the jats, and the rajputs, were interested in consolidating their regional, tribal, or personal power and had no notion of fighting for a nation called india or for its unity.
the reality was that the existing character of the indian economy, social relations, caste structure, and political institutions was such that the time was not yet ripe for the unification of indian society or for its emergence as a nation the mughal empire might have continued to ewst for a long time if its administration and firmed power had not broken down, mostly as a result of the factors discussed above.
there was rapid decline in the administrative efficiency of the empire during the 18th century administration was neglected and law and order broke down in many parts of the country.
unruly zamindars openly defied central authority.
even the royal camp and mughal armies on the march were often plundered by hostile elements.
corruption and bribery, indiscipline and inefficiency, disobedience and disloyalty prevailed on a large scale among officials at all levels.
the central government was often on the verge of bankruptcy.
the old accumulated wealth was exhausted while the existing sources of income were narrowed.
many provinces failed to remit provincial revenues to he centre.
the area of the khahsah lands was gradually reduced as emperors tried to placate friendly nobles by granting jagirs out of these lands.
the rebellious zamindars regularly withheld revenue.
efforts to increase income by oppressing the peasantry produced popular reaction.
ultimately, the military strength of the empire was affectcd.
during the 18th century the mughal army lacked discipline and fighting morale, lack of finance made it difficult to maintain a large army its soldiers and officers were not paid for months, the decline op the mughal empire 13 and, since they were mere mercenaries, they were constantly disaffected and often verged on a mutiny.
again, the noblemencumcommanders did not maintain their full quota of military contingents because of their own financial troubles moreover, the crvit wars resulted in the death of many brilliant commanders and brave and experienced soldiers.
thus, the army, the ultimate sanction of an empire, and the pride of the great mughals, was so weakened that it could no longer curb the ambitious chiefs and nobles or defend the empire from foreign aggression.
the decline of the mughal emp1rl 14 the final blow to the mughal empire was given by a series of foreign invasions.
attacks by nadir shah and ahmad shah abdali, which were themtelvcs the consequences of the weakness of the empire, drained the empire of its wealth, ruined its trade and industry in the north, and almost destroyed its military power.
finally, the emergence of the british challenge took away the last hope of the revival of the crisisridden empire.
in this last fact lies the most important consequence of the decline of the mughal empire.
none of the indian powers rose to claim the heritage of the grand mughals for they were strong enough to destroy the empire but not strong enough to unite it or to create any thing new in its place.
they could not create a new social order which could stand up to the new enemy from the west.
all of them represented the same moribund social system as headed by the mughals and all of them suffered from the weaknesses which had destroyed the mighty mughal empire.
on the other hand, the europeans knocking at the gates of india had the benefit of coming from societies which had evolved a superior economic system and which were more advanced in science and technology.
the tragedy of the decline of the mughal empire was that its mantle fell on a foreign power which dissolved, m its own interests, the centuriesold socioeconomic and political structure of the country and replaced it with a colonial structure.
but some good was destined to come out of this evil.
the stagnation of indian society was broken and new forces of change emerged.
this process because it grew out of a colonial contact inevitably brought with it extreme misery and national degradation, not to mention economic, political, and cultural backwardness.
but it was precisely these new forces of change which were to provide the dynamism of modern india.
e x e r c i s e s 1. how did the mughal empire shrink to the area around delhi what were the steps taken by the rulers and high officials to save the empire 2. critically examine aurangzebs responsibility for the decline of the mughal empire.
3. how did the nobility contribute to the decline of the mughal empire 4. what role did stagnation in agriculture and industry play in under mining the functioning of the mughal empire 5. write short notes on  a bahadur shah,  zulfiqar khan, c saiyid brothers, id nadir shah and his invasion of india, e the crisis of the jgirdan system.
based upon survey of india map with the permission of the surveyor ueneral of india.
the territorial waters oflndia extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line 16 modern india indian states and society in the 18th century n the debris of the mughal empire and its political system arose a large number of independent and semiindependent powers such as bengal, avadh, hyderabad, mysore and the maratha kingdom.
it is these powers which challenged the british attempt at supremacy in india in the second half of the 18lh century.
some arose as a result of the assertion of autonomy by governors of mughal provinces, others were the product of rebellion against mughal authority.
the rulers of these states established law and order and viable economic and administrative states.
they curbed, with varying degrees of success, the lower local officials and petty chicfs and 2ammdars who constantly fought with higher authorities for control over the surplus pro duce of the peasant, and who sometimes succeeded in establishing oca centres of power and patronage.
the politics of these states were invariably noncommunal or secular, the motivations of their rulers being similar in economic and political terms.
these rulers did not discriminate on religious grounds in public appointments, civil or military nor did the rebels against their authority pay much attention to the religion of the rulers none of these states, however, succeeded in arresting the economic crisis.
the zamindats and jagirdars, whose number constantly increased, continued to fight over a declining income from agriculture, while the condition of the peasantry continued to deteriorate.
while these states prevented any breakdown of internal trade and even tried to promote foreign trade, they did nothing to modernise the basic industrial and commercial structure of their states, hyderabad1 and the carnatic the state of hyderabad was founded by nizamulmulk as if jah in 1724 he was one of the leading nobles of the postaurangzeb erai hr poed a rrf n the overthrow of the saiyid brothers and was re  ih  iiv  ..1 of the deccan.
from 17l0 to 1752 he can solid ated his hold over the deccan by suppressing all opposition to his viceroyalty and organising the administration on efficient lines.
from 1722 to 1724 he was the wazir of the empire.
but he soon got disgusted with that office as the emperor muhammad shah frustrated all his attempts at reforming the administration.
so lie decided to go back to the deccan where he could safely maintain his supremacy.
here he laid the foundations of the hyderabad state which he ruled with a strong hand.
he never openly declared his independence from the central government but in practice he acted like an independent ruler.
he waged wars, concluded peace, conferred titles, and gave jagirs and offices without reference to delhi.
he followed a tolerant policy towards the hindus, for example, a hindu, puran chand, was his dewan.
he consolidated his o power by establishing an orderly administration in the deccan.
he forced the big, turbulent zamindars to respect his authority and kept the powerful marathas out of his dominions.
he also made an attempt to rid the revenue system of its corruption.
but after his death in 1748, hyderabad fell prey to the same disruptive forces as were operating at delhi, the carnatic was one of the subahs of the mughal deccan and as such came under the nizam of hyderabads authority.
but just as in practice the nizam had become independent of delhi, so also the deputy governor of the carnatic, known as the nawab of carnatic, had freed himself of the control of the viceroy of the deccan and made his office hereditaiy.
thus nawab saadutullah khan of carnatic had made his nephew dost ali his successor without the approval of his superior, the nizam.
later, after 1740, the affairs of the carnatic deteriorated because of the repeated struggles for its nawabship and this provided an opportunity to the european trading companies to interfere in indian politics.
bengal taking advantage of the growing weakness of the central authority, two men of exceptional ability, murshid quh khan and alivardi khan, made bengal virtually independent, even though murshid quh khan was made governor of bengal as late as 1717, he had been its effective ruler since 1700, when he was appointed its dewan.
he soon freed himself from central control though he sent regular tribute to the emperor.
he established pcace by freeing bengal of internal and external danger.
bengal was now also lelatively free of uprisings by zamindars.
the only three major uprisings during his rule were first by sitaram ray, udai narayan and ghulani muhammad, and then by shujat khan, and finally bynajat khan aftei defeating them, murshid quli khan gave their zamvndaris to his favounte, ramjivan.
murshid quh khan died m 1727, and his soninlaw slmjauddin ruled bengal till 1739. in that year, 18 modlrn india alivardi khan deposed and killed shujauddins son, sarfaraz khdn, and made himself the nawab.
these three nawabs gave bengal a long period of peace and orderly administration and promoted its trade and industry.
mursliid quli khan effected economies in the administration and reorganised the finances of bengal by transferiing large parts of jagir lands into khahsah lands by carrying out a fresh revetnie settlement, and by introducing the system of revenuefarming.
he also granted agricultural loans taccavi to the poor cultivators to relieve their distress as well as to enable them to pay land revenue in time.
he was thus able to increase the resources of the bengal government but the system of revenuefarming led to increased economic pressure on the peasant.
moreover, even though he demanded only the standard revenne and forbade illegal cesses, he collected the levenue from the zamindars and the peasants with utmost cruelty.
another result of his reforms was that many of the older zamindars were driven out and their place taken by upstart revenue farmers.
murshid quli khan and the succeeding nawabs gave equal opportunities for employment to hindus and muslims.
they filled the highest civil posts and many of the military posts with bengalis, most of whom were hindus.
in choosing revenue farmers murshid quli khan gave preference to local zamindars and mahajans moneylenders who were mainly hindus.
he thus laid the foundations of a new landed aristocracy in bengal.
all the three nawabs recognised that expansion of trade benefited the people and the government, and, therefore, gave encouragement to all merchants, indian or foreign.
they provided for the safety of roads and rivers from thieves and robbers by establishing regular thancts and chowkies.
they checked private trade by officials.
they prevented abuses in the customs administration.
at the same time they made it a point to maintain strict control over the foreign trading companies and their servants and prevented them from abusing their privileges.
they compelled the servants of the english east india company to obey the laws of the land and to pay the same customs duties as were being paid by other merchants.
alivardi khan did not permit the english and the french to fortify their factories in calcutta and chandranagar.
the bengal nawabs proved, however, to be shortsighted and negligent, in one respect, they did not firmly put down the increasing tendency of the english.
east  india company after 1707 to use military force, or to threaten its use, to get its demands accepted.
they had the power to deal with the companys threats, but they continued to believe that a mere trading company could not threaten their power.
they failed to see that the english company was no mere company of traders but was the representative of the most aggressive and expansionist colonialism of the time.
their ignorance of, and lack of contact with, the lest of the world was to cost the state dear.
otherwise, they would have known of the devastation caused by the western ti tiding companies m africa, southeast asia, and latin america.
the nawabs of bengal neglected to build a strong army and paid a heavy price for it.
for example, the army of murshid quh khan consisted of only 2000 cavalry and 4000 infantry alivardi khan was constantly troubled hy the repeated invasions of the marathas and, in the end, he had to cede a laige part of oiissa to them.
and when, in indian states and society in the 18th century 19 175657, die english east india company declaied war on sirajuddaulah, the successor of ahvardi, the absence of a strong army contributed much to the victory of the foreigner.
the bengal nawabs also failed to check the growing corruption among their officials even judicial officials, the qazis and muftis, were given to taking bribes.
the foreign companies took full advantage of this weakness to undermine official rules and regulations and policies.
avadh the founder of the autonomous kingdom of avadh was saadat khan burhanul mulk who was appointed governor of avadh in 1722. he was ail extremely bold, energetic, ironwilled, and intelligent pet son.
at the time of his appointment, rebellious zamindars had raised their heads everywhere in the province.
they icfused to pay the iand tax, organised their own private aimies, erected forts, and defied the imperial government for yeais saadat khan had to wage war upon them.
he succeeded in suppressing lawlessness and disciplining the big zamin dars and thus, increasing the financial resouices of his government.
most of the defeated zamindars were, however, not displaced.
they were usually confirmed in their estates after they had submitted and agreed to pay their dues land revenue1 regularly moreover, they continued to be refractory.
whenever the nawabs military hold weakened or he was engaged in some other direction, they would rebel, thus weakening the nawabs power.
as safdar jang, saadat khans successor, later wrote.
the avadh chiefs., were capable of creating a disturbance in the twinkling of an eye and were more dangerous than the marathas of the deccan  saadat khan alsoearned out a fresh ie venue settlement in 1723 he is said to have improved the lot of the peasant by levying equitable land revenue and by protecting him from oppression by the big zamindars.
like the bengal nawabs, he too did not discriminate between hindus and muslims.
many of his commanders and high officials were hindus, and he curbed refractory zamindars, chiefs, and nobles irrespective of their religion.
his troopswere wellpaid, wellarmed, and welltrained his administration was efficient.
before his death in.
1739, he had become virtually independent and had made the province a hereditary possession.
he was succeeded by his nephew safdar jang, who was simultaneously appointed the wazir of the empire in 1748 and granted in addition the province of allahabad.
safdar jang gave a long period of peace to the people of avadli and allahabad before his death in 1754. he suppressed rebellious zamindars and made an alliance with the maratha sardars so that his dominion was saved from their incursions.
he carried on warfare against the rohelas and the bangash pathans.
in his war against the bangash nawabs in 175051, he secured maratha military help by paying a daily allowance of rs.
25,000 and jat support by paying rs.
15,000 a day.
later, he entered into an agreement with the pesmva by which the peshwa was to help the mughal empire against ahmad shah abdali and to protect it from such internal rebels as the indian pathans and the rajput rajas.
in return the peshwa was to be paid rs.
50 lakhs, granted the chauth of the punjab, sindh, and several districts of northern india, and 20 modlrn india made the governor of ajmer and agra.
the agreement failed, however, as the peshwa went over to safdar jangs enemies at delhi who promised him the governorship of avadh and allahabad.
safdar jang also organised an equitable system of justice.
he too adopted a policy of impartiality in the employment of hindus and muslims.
the highest post in his government was held by a hindu, maharaja nawab rai.
the prolonged period of peace and of economic prosperity of the nobles under the government of the nawabs resulted in time in the growth of a distinct lucknow culture around the avadh court.
luck now, for long an important city of avadh, and the seat of the avadh nawabs after 1775, soon rivalled delhi in its patronage of arts and literature.
it also developed as an important centre of handicrafts.
safdar jang maintained a very high standard of peisonal morality.
all his life he was devoted to his only wife.
as a matter of fact all the founders of the three autonomous kingdoms of hyderabad, bengal, and avadh, namely, nizamuimulk, murshid quli khan and alivardi khan, and saadat khan and safdar jang, were men of high personal morality.
nearly all of them led austere and simple , jives.
their lives give lie to the belief that all the leading nobles of the 18th century led extravagant and luxurious lives.
it was only in their public and political dealings that they resorted to fraud, intrigue and treachery, mysore .
next to hyderabad, the most important power that emerged in south india was mysore under haidar ah.
the kingdom of mysore had 21 modern india preserved its precarious independence ever since the end of the vijaya nagar empire, early in the 18th century two ministers nanjaraj the sarvadhikan and devraj the dulwai had seized power in mysore reducing the king chikka krishna raj to a mere puppet.
haidar all, born in 1721 in an obscure family, started his career as a petty officer in the mysore army.
though uneducated he possessed a keen intellect and was a man of great energy and daring and determination.
he was also a brilliant commander and a shrewd diplomat.
haidar ali soon found his opportunity in the wars which involved mysore for more than twenty years.
cleverly using the opportunities that came his way, he gradually rose in the mysore army.
he soon recognised the advantages of western military training and applied it to the troops under his own command.
he established a modern arsenal in dindigul in 1755 with the help of french experts in 1761 he overthrew nanjaraj and established his authority over the mysore state.
he extended full control over the rebellious poligars zamindars and conquered the territories of bidnur, sunda, sera, canara and malabar.
though illiterate he was an efficient administrator.
he took over mysore when 22 modern india it was a weak and divided state and soon made it one of the leading indian powers.
he practised religious toleration and lus first dewan and many other officials were hindus.
almost from the beginning of the establishment of his power, he was engaged in wars with the maratha sardais, the nizam, and the british.
in 1769, he repeatedly defeated the british forces and reached the walls of madras.
he died in 1782 in the course of the second anglomysore war and was succeeded hy his son tipu.
sultan tipu, who ruled mysore till his death at the hands of the british in 1799, was a man of complex character.
he was, for one, an innovator.
his desire to change with the times was symbolised in the introduction of a new calendar, a new system of coinage, and new scales of weights and measures his personal library contained books on such diverse subjects as religion, history, military science, medicine, and mathematics.
he showed a keen interest in the french revolution.
he planted a tree of liberty at sringapatam and he became a member of a jacobin club.
his organisational capacity is borne out by the fact that in those days of general indiscip line among indian armies his troops remained disciplined and loyal to him to the last.
he tried to do away with the custom of giving jagirs, and thus increase state income.
he also made an attempt to reduce the hereditary possessions of the poligars.
however, his land revenue was as high as that of other contemporary rulersit ranged up to 1 3rd of the gross produce.
but he checked the collection of soldier in uniformin the service of tipu sultan courtesy.
national archives of india, new delhi indian states and society in the 18th century 23 illegal cesses, and he was liberal in granting remissions.
his infantry was armed with muskets and bayonets in fashion which were, however, manufactured in mysore.
he effort to build a modern navy after 1796. for this purpose two dockyards, the models of the ships being supplied 1 himself.
in personal life he was free of vices and kept i luxury.
he was recklessly brave and, as a commander, 1 was, however, hasty in action and unstable in nature.
as a statesman, he, more than any other 18th century recognised to the full extent the threat that the english p india as well as to other indian powers he stood forth a foe of the rising english power.
the english, in turn, loo as their most dangerous enemy in india.
though not free from contemporary economic backwar flourished economically under haidar all and tipu, especi.
in contrast with its immediate past or with the rest of the cc the british occupied mysore after defeating and killing they were completely surprised to find that the mysore pea more prosperous than the peasant in british occupied john shore, governorgeneral from 1793 to 1798, wrote peasantry of his dominions are protected, and their laho and rewarded.
tipu also seems to have grasped the modem trade and industry.
in fact, alone among the ini understood the importance of economic strength as the military strength.
he rte some attempts to introduce tries in india by importing foreign workmen as experts an state support to many industries.
he sent embassies to f iran and pegu to develop foreign trade he also trade he even tried to set up a trading company on the .patter companies.
, ...  some british historians have described tipu as a rel but this is not borne out by facls.
though he was ortho gious views, he was in fact tolerant and enlightened in toward other religions.
he gave, money for the constmclic of goddess sarda in the shnngcri temple after the latter the maratha horsemen m 1791. he regularly gave gifts tc well as several other temples.
the famous temple of sri  situated barely 100 yards from his palace.
kerala at the beginning of the 18ih century kerala was divide large number of feudal chiefs and lajas.
the four most in were those of calicut undei the zaniorin, chirakkal, cochi indian statcs and society in the 18th centuky 24 core.
the kingdom of travancore rose into prominence after 1729 under king martanda varma, one of the leading statesmen of the 18th century.
he combined rare foresight and strong determination with courage and daring.
he subdued the feudatories, conquered quilon and elayadam, and defeated the dutch and thus ended their political power in kerala.
he organised a strong army on the western model with the help of european officers and armed it with modern weapons.
he also constructed a modern arsenal.
martanda varma used his new army to expand northwards and the boundaries of travancore soon extended from kanya kumari to cochin.
he undertook many irrigation works, built roads and canals for communication, and gave active encouragement to foreign trade.
by 1763, all the petty principalities of kerala had been absorbed or subordinated by the three big states of cochin, travancore, and calicut, haidar all began his invasion of kerala in 1766 and in the end annexed northern kerala up to cochin, including the territories of the zamorin of calicut.
the 18th century saw a remarkable revival in malayalam literature.
this was due in part lo the rajas and chiefs of kerala who were great patrons of literature.
trivandrum, the capital of travancore, became in the second half of the 18th century a famous centre of sanskrit scholarship.
rama varma, successor of martanda varma, was himself a poet, a scholar, a musician, a renowned actor, and a man of great culture, he conversed fluently in english, took a keen interest in european affairs, and regularly read newspapers and journals published in london, calcutta and madras.
areas around delhi 77ie rajput stales the principal rajput states took advantage of the growing weakness of mughal power to virtually free themselves from central control while at the same time increasing their influence in the rest of the empire.
tn the reigns of farrukh siyar and muhammad shah the rulers of amber and marwar were appointed governors of important mughal provinces such as agra, gujarat, and malwa.
the rajputana states continued to be as divided as before.
the biggei among them expanded at the cost of their weaker neighbouis, rajput and nonrajput.
most of the larger rajput slates were constantly involved in petty quarrels and civil wats, the internal politics of these states were often characterised by the same type of corruption, intrigue, and treachery as prevailed at the mughal court thus, ajit singh of marwar was killed by his own son.
the most outstanding rajput ruler of the istti century was raja sawai jai singh of amber 16811743. he was a distinguished statesman, lawmaker, and reformer.
but most of all he shone as a man of science in an age when indians were oblivious to scientific progress.
he founded the city of jaipur in the territory taken from the jats and made it a great seat of science and art.
jaipur was built upon strictly scientific principles and according to a regular plan.
its broad stieets are intersected at right angles.
jai singh was above everything a great astronomer.
he erected observatories with accurate and advanced instruments, some of them of his own invention, at indian states akd society in the lbth centuky 25 delhi, jaipur, ujjain, varanasi, and mathura.
his astronomical observations were remarkably accurate he drew up a set of tables, entitled zij muhammadshahi, to enable people to make astronomical observations.
he had euclids elements of geometry, translated into sanskrit as also several works on trignometry, and napiers work on the construction and use of logarithms.
jai singh was also a social reformer.
he tried to enforce a law to reduce the lavish expenditure which a rajput had to incur on a daughters wedding and which often led to infanticide.
this remarkable prince ruled jaipur for nearly 44 years from 1699 to 1743. the jats the jats, a caste of agriculturists, lived in the region around delhi, agra and mathura.
oppression by mughal officials drove the jat peasants around mathura to revolt.
they revolted under the leadership of their jat zamindars in 1669 and then again in 1688. these revolts were crushed but the area remained disturbed.
after the death of aurang zeb, they created disturbances all around delhi.
though originally a peasant uprising, the jat revolt, led by zamindars, soon became predatory.
they plundered all and sundry, the rich and the poor, the jagirdars and the peasants, the hindus and the muslims.
they took activc part in the court intrigues at delhi, often changing sides to suit their own advantage.
the jat state of bharatpur was set up by churaman and badn singh, the jat power reached its highest gloiy under suraj mai, who ruled from 1756 to 1763 and who was an extremely able administrator and soldier and,a very wise statesman.
he extended his authority over a large area which extended from the ganga in the east to cham bat in the south, the subah of agra in the west to the subah of delhi in the north.
his state included among otficis the districts of agra, mathura, meerut, and aligarh.
a contemporary imturian has described him as follows though he wore the jress of a fj.imei and could sieak onlj his ovn jliuj dialed, he wiis the pluto of l lie jill tribe in prurience a nil skill, and ability lo manage the revenue and civil affair he fiat no equal among ilic crumlecs of hindustan except asaf jah bahadur.
after his death in 1763, the jat stale declined and was split up among petty zamindars most of whom lived by plunder.
btiguh path nos and rohelas muhammad khan bangash, an afghan adventurer, established his control over the territory around farmkhabad, between what are now aiigarh and kanpur, during the reigns of farrukh siyar and muhammad sfiah.
similarly, during the breakdown of administration following nadir shahs invasion, ali muhammad khan carved out a separate principality, known as rohilkhand, at the foothills of the himalayas between the ganga in the south and the kumaon hills in the north with its capital at first ataoian in bareilly and later at rampur.
the rohelas clashed constantly with avadh, delhi, and the jats.
hie sikhs founded at the end of the 15th century by guru nanak.
the sikh religion spread among the jat peasantry and other lower castes of the punjab.
the transformation of the sikhs into a militant, fighting community was begun by guru hargobind 16061645. it was, however, under the leadership cf guru gobind singh 16641708,.the tenth and the last guru of the sikhs, that they 26 modern india became a political and military force.
from 1699 onwards, guru gobind singh waged constant war against the armies of aurangzeb and the hill rajas.
after aurangzebs death guru gobind singh joined bahadur shahs camp as a noble of the rank of 5000 sat and 5000 sowar and accompanied him to the deccan where he was treacherously murdered by one of his pathan employees.
after guru gobind singhs death the institution of guruship came to an end and the leadership of the sikhs passed to his trusted disciple banda singh, who is more widely known as banda bahadur.
banda rallied together the sikh peasants of the punjab and carried on a vigorous though unequal struggle against the mughal army for eight years.
he was captured in 1715 and put to death.
his death gave a setback to the territorial ambitions of the sikhs, and their power declined.
the invasions of nadir shah and ahmad shah abdali and the consequent dislocation of puijab administration gave the sikhs an opportunity to rise once again.
in the wake of the marches of the invaders armies, they plundered all and sundry and gained wealth and military power.
with the withdrawal of abdali from the punjab, they began to fill the political vacuum.
between 1765 and 1800 they brought the punjab and jammu under their control.
the sikhs were organised into 12 mills or confederacies which operated in different parts of the province.
these misls fully cooperated with each other.
they were originally based on the principle of equality, with all members having an equal voice in deciding the affairs of a misl and in electing its chief and other officers.
gradually the democratic character of the misls disappeared and powerftil chiefs 23 modern india dominated them.
the spirit of brotherhood and unity of the khatsa also disappeared as these chiefs constantly quarrelled with one another and set themselves up as independent chieftains.
the punjab under ranjit singh at the end of the 18th ccntury, ranjit singh, chief of the sukerchakia mis, rose into prominence.
a strong and courageous soldier, an efficient administrator, and a skilful diplomat, he was a born leader of men.
he captured lahore in 1799 and amritsar in 3802. he soon brought all sikh chiefs west of the sutlej under his control and established his own kingdom in the punjab.
later, he conquered kashmir, peshawar, and multan.
the old sikh chiefs were transformed into big zamindars and jagirdars.
he did not make any changes in the system of land revenue promulgated earlier by the mughals.
the amount of lanj revenue was calculated on the basis of 50 per cent of the gross produce.
ranjit stngfi built up a powerful, disciplined, and wellequipped army along european lines with the help of european instructors.
his new army was not confined to the sikhs.
he also recruited gurkhas, biharis, oriyas, pathans, dogras, and punjabi muslims.
he set up modern foundries to manufacture cannon at lahore and employed muslim gunners to man them.
it is said that he possessed the second best army in asia, the first being the army of the english east india company, ranjit singh had great capacity for choosing his ministers and officials.
his court was sfcidded with outstanding men.
he was tolerant and liberal in religious matters, while a devout sikh he was known to step down,from his throne to wipe the dust off the feet of muslim mendicants with his long grey heard.
many of his important ministers and commanders were muslims and hindus.
the most prominent and trusted of his ministers was fakir azizuddin, while his finance minister was dewan dina nath.
in fact, in no sense ws the punjab, ruled by ranjit singh, a sirkh state.
poli.cal power ipneft used for exclusive sikh benefit on the ovn haul, ihe sikh pedant a as ui much tppiesscd by sikh chieft aswasthj hindu rrtie fu.ri piasur.t i.i iat the s, imucc of the punjab as.
a fee mdci ranul sini wjs mrriiia to il.o mmiurc of the other indian siiiis of iha jsti ivniuii when thebritish forbade ranjrf singh m 1809 to cross tlic sutlej and took the sikhstates east of the river under their protection, he kept quiet fbr hevealised that his sfrength was no matbh for the british, thus by his diplomatic realism and military strength he temporarily saved his kingdom fiom englishencroachment.
but he did not remove the foreign lhicat, he oil left n put to hi successors.
and so, aftei his death, whcithi kirilom wjs .rn h an intense internal struggle forpower, the 1nglish moved in and conquered it 1ndkn states and boulty in 1hl 18 111 century 29 the rise and fall of he maratha power the most important challenge to the decaying mughal power came from the maratha kingdom which was the most powerful of the succession stales.
in fact, it alone possessed the stiength to fill the political vacuum created by the disintegration of the mughal empire.
moreover, it produced a number of brilliant commanders and statesmen needed for the task.
but the maratha sardars lackcd unity, and they lacked the outlook and programme which were necessary for founding an alhndia empire, and so they failed to replace the mughals.
they did, however, succeed in waging continuous war against the mughal empire, till they destroyed it.
shahu, grandson of shivaji, had been a prisoner in the hands of aurangzeb since 1689. aurangzeb had treated him and his mother with great dignity, honour, and consideration, paying full attention to their religious,, caste, and other needs, hoping perhaps to arrive at a political agreement with shahu.
shahu was released in 1707 after aurangzebs death.
veiy soon a civil war broke out between shahu at satara and his aunt tara bai at kolhapur who had carried out an antimughal struggle since 1700 in the name of her son shivaji ii nfter the death of her husband raja ram.
maratha sardars, each one of whom had a large following of soldiers loyal to himself filone, began to side with one or the other contender for power.
they used this opportunity to increase their power and influence by bargaining with the two contenders for power.
several of them even intrigued with the mughal viceroys of the deccan.
arising out of the conflict between shahu and his rival at kolhapur, a new system of maratha government was evolved under the leadership of balaji vishwanath, the peswa of king shahu.
with this change began the second periodthe period of peshwa domination in maratha history in which the maratha state was transformed into an empiie balaji vishwanath, a brahmin, started life as a petty revenue official and then rose step by step as an official.
he rendered shahu loyal and useful service in suppresssing his enemies.
he excelled in diplomacy and won over many of the big maratha sardars to shahus1 cause.
th 1713, shahu made him his peshwa or the niukh pradtian chief minister.
balaji vishwanath gradually consolidated shahus hold and his own over maratha sardars and over most of maharashtra except for the region south of kolhapur where raja rams descendents ruled.
the peshwa concentrated power in his office and eclipsed the other ministers and sardars.
in fact he and his son rao i made the peshwa the functional head of the maratha empire.
l balaji vishwanath took full advantage of the internal conflicts of thi mughal officials to increase maratha power.
he had induced zulfiqar khan to pay the chauth and saideslituikhi of the deccaii.
in the end, he signed a pact with the saiyid brothers.
all the territories that had earlier formed shivajis kingdom were restored to shahu who was also assigned the chautk and sardeshmtikhl of the six provinces of the deccan.
in return shahu, who had already recognised, though nominally, mughal suzerainty, agreed to place a body of 15,000 cavalry troops at the emperors service, to prevent rebellion and plundering in the deccan, and to pay an annual tribute of 10 lakh rupees.
in 1719, balaji vishwanath, at the head of a maratha force, accompanied saiyid hussain ali khan to delhi and helped 30 modern india the saiyid brothers in overthrowing farrukh siyar.
at delhi he and the other maratha sardars witnessed at first hand the weakness of the empire and were filled with the ambition of expansion in the north.
for the efficient collection of the chautb and sardnhmukhi of the deccan, balaji vishwanath assigned separate areas to maratha sardars who kept the greater part of the collection for their expenses.
this system of assignment of the chaulh and sardeshmukiu also enabled the peshwa to increase his personal power through patronage.
an increasing number of ambitious sardars began to flock to his side.
in the long run this was to be a major source of weakness to the maratha empire already the system of watans and saranjams jagirs had made maratha sardars strong, autonomous, and jealous of central power.
they now began to establish their control in the distant lands of the mughal empire where they gradually settled down as more or less autonomous chicfs.
thus the conquests of the marathas outside their original kingdom were not made by a central army directly controlled by the maratha king or the peshwa but by sardars with their own private armies.
during the process of conquest these sardars often dashed wilh one another, if the central authority tried to control them too strictly, they did not hesitate to join hands with enemies, be they the nizam, the mughals, or the english.
balaji vishwanath died in 1720. he was succeeded as peshwa by his 20year old son baji rao i. in spiie of his youth, baji rao was a bold and brilliant commander and an ambitious and clever statesman.
he has been described as the greatest exponent of guerrilla tactics after shivaji.
led by baji rao, the marathas waged numerous campaigns against the mughal empire trying to compel the mughal officials first to give them the right to collect the chaulh of vast areas and then to cede these areas to the maratha kingdom.
by 1740, when baji rao died, the marathas had won control over malwa, gujarat, and parts of bundel khand.
the maratha families of gaekwad, holkar, sindhia, and bhonsle came into prominence during this period.
all his life baji rao worked to contain nizamulmuiks power in the deccan.
the latter, on his part, constantly intrigued with the raja of kolhapur, the maratha sardars, and mughal officials to weaken the peshwfls authority.
twice the two met on the field of battle and both indian states and society in the 18th century 31 times the nizam was worsted and was compelled to grant the marathas the chauth and sardeshmukhi of the deccan provinces.
in 1733, baji rao started a long campaign against the sidis of janjira and in the end expelled them from the mainland.
simultaneously, a campaign against the portuguese was started.
in the end salsette and bassein were captured.
but the portuguese continued to hold their other possessions on the west coast.
bsji rao died in april 1740. in the short period of 20 years he had changed the character of the maratha state.
from the kingdom of maharashtra, it had been transformed into an empire expanding in the north.
he, however, failed to lay firm foundations for an empire.
new territories were conquered and occupied but little attention was paid to their administiation.
the chief concern of the successful sardars was with the collection of revenues.
baji raos 18year old son balaji baji rao known more widely as nana saheb was the peshwa from 1740 to 1761. he was as able as his father though less energetic.
king shahu died in 1749 and by his will left all management of state affairs in the feshwas hands.
the office of the peshwa had already become hereditary and the peshwa was the de facto ruler of the state.
now he became the official head of the administration and, as a symbol of this fact, shifted the government to poona, his headquarters.
balaji baji rao followed in the footsteps of his father and further extended the empire in different directions taking maratha power to its height.
maratha armies now overran the whole of india.
maratha control over malwa, gujarat, and bundelkhand was consolidated.
bengal was repeatedly invaded and, in 1751, the bengal nawab had to cede orissa.
in the south, the state of mysore and other minor principalities were forced to pay tribute.
in 1760, the nizam of hyderabad was defeated at udgir and was compelled to cede vast territories yielding an annual revenue of rs.
62 lakhs.
tn the north, the marathas soon became the power behind the mughal throne.
marching through the gangetic doab and rajputna they reached delhi where, in 1752, they helped imadulmulk to become the wazir.
the new wazir soon became a puppet in, their hands.
from delhi they turned to the punjab and soon brought it under control after expelling the agent of ahmad shah abdali.
this brought them into conflict with the doughty warriorking of afghanistan, who once again marched into india to settle accounts with the maratha power.
a major conflict for mastery over north india now began.
ahmad shah abdali soon formed an auiance with najibuddaulah of rohilkhand and shujauddau 1 ah of avadh, both of whom had suffered at the hands of the maratha sardars.
recognising the great importance of the coming struggle, the peshwa despatched a powerful army to the north voder the nominal command of his minor son, the actual command being in the hands of his cousin sadashiv rao bhau.
an important arm of this force was a contingent of european style infantry and artillery commanded by ibrahim khan gardi.
the marathas now tried to find allies among the northern powers.
but their earlier behaviour and political ambitions had antagonised all these powers.
they had interfered in the internal affairs or the raj pu tana states and levied huge tines and tributes upon them.
they had made large 32 modern india territorial and monetary claims upon avadh.
their actions in the punjab had angered the sikh chiefs.
similarly, the jat chiefs, on whom also heavy fines bad been imposed by thim, did not trust them.
they had, therefore, to fight their enemies all atone, except for the weak support of imadulmulk moreover, the senior maratha commanders constantly bickered with each other.
the two forces met at panipat on 14 january 1761. the maratha army was completely routed.
the peshwas son, vishwas rao, sadashiv rao bhau and numerous other maratha commanders perished on the battle field as did nearly 28,000 soldiers.
those who fled were pursued by the afghan cavalry and robbed and plundered by the jats, ahirs, and gujars of the panipat region.
the peshwa, who was marching north to render help to his cousin, was stunned by the tragic news.
already seriously ill, his end was hastened and he died in june 1761. the maratha defeat at panipat was a disaster for them.
theylost the cream of their aimy and their political prestige suffered a big blow.
most of all, their defeat gave an opportunity to the english east india company to consolidate its power in bengal and indian states and society in the 18th cbntuxy 33 south india.
nor did the afghans benefit from their victory.
they could not even hold the punjab.
in fact, the third battle of panipat did not decide who was to rule india but rather who was not.
the way was, therefore, cleared for the rise of the british power in india.
the 17year old madhav rao became the peshwa in 1761. he was a talented soldier and statesman.
within the short period of 11 years, he restored the lost fortunes of the maratha empire.
he defeated the nizam, compelled haidar ali of mysore to pay tribute, and reasserted control over north india by defeating the rohelas artd subjugating the rajput states and jat chiefs.
in 1771, the marathas brought back to delhi emperor shah alam, who now became their pensioner.
thus it appeared as if maratha ascendancy in the north had been recovered.
once again, however, a blow fell on the marathas for madhav rao died of consumption in 1772. the maratha empire was now in a state of confusion.
at poona there was a struggle for power between raghu nath rao, the younger brother of balaji baji rao, and narayan rao, the younger brother of madhav rao.
narayan rao was killed in 1773. he was succeeded by his posthumous son, sawai madhav rao, out of frustration, ragbunath rao went over to the british and tried to capture power with their help.
this resulted in the first anglomacatha war.
the peshwas power was now on the wane.
at poona there was constant intrigue between the supporters of sawai madhav rao, headed by nana phadnis, and the partisans of raghunath.
rao.
in the meanwhile the big maratha sardars had been carving out semi independent states in the north, which could seldom cooperate.
gaekwad at baroda, bhonsle at nagpur, holkar at indore, and sindhia at gwalior were the most important.
they had established regular administrations on the pattern of mughal administration and possessed their separate armies.
their allegiance to the peshwas became more and more nominal.
instead they joined opposing factions at poona and intrigued with the enemies of the maratha empire., soldiers bazar in a maratha camp courtesy national archives of india, new delhi 34 modern india among the maratha rulers in the north, mahadji sindhia was the most important.
he organised a powerful army with the help of french officers and established control over emperor shah alam in 1784. from the emperor he secured the appointment of the peshwa as the emperors deputy natbimunaib on the condition that mahadji would act on behalf of the peshwa.
but he spent his energies in intriguing against nana phadnis.
he was also a bitter enemy of holkar of indore.
he died in 1794. he and nana phadnis, who died in 1800, were the last of the great soldiers and statesmen who had raised the maratha power to its height ,in the 18th ,century.
sawai madhav rao died in 1795 and was succeeded by the utterly worthless baji rao ii, son of raghunath rao.
the british had by now decided to put an end to the maratha challenge to their supremacy in india.
the british divided the mutuallywarring maratha sardars through clever diplomacy and then overpowered them in separate battles during the second maratha war, 18051805, and the third maratha war, 1816 1819, while other maratha states were permitted to remain as subsidiary states, the house of the peshwas was extinguished.
thus, the maratha dream of controlling the mughal empire and establishing their own empire over large parts of the country could not be realised.
this was basically because the maratha empire represented the indian states and society in the 18th century 35 same decadent social order as the mughal empire did and suffered from the same underlying weaknesses.
the maratha chiefs were very similar to the later mughal nobles, just as the saranjami system was similar to the mughal system of jagirs.
so long as there existed a strong central authority and the need for mutual cooperation against a common enemy, the mughals, they remained united in a loose union.
but at the first opportunity they tended to assert their autonomy.
.
if anything, they were even less disciplined than the mughal nobles.
nor did the maratha sardars try to develop a new economy.
they failed to encourage science and technology or to take much interest in trade and industry.
their revenue system was similar to that of the mughals as also was their administration.
like the mughals, the maratha rulers were also mainly interested in raising revenue from the helpless peasantry.
for example, they too collected nearly half of agricultural produce as tax.
unlike the mughals, they failed even to give sound administration to the people outside maharashtra, they could not inspire the indian people with any higher degree of loyalty than the mughals had succeeded in doing.
their dominion too depended on force and force alone.
the only way the marathas could have stood up to the rising british powerwas to have transformed their state into a modem state, this they falied to do.
social and economic conditions of the people india of the 18th century failed to make progress economically, socially, or culturally at a pace which would have saved the country from collapse.
the increasing revenue demands of the state, the oppression of the officials, the greed and rapacity of the nobles, reveuuefarmers, and zamindars, the marches and counter marches of the rival armies, and the depredations of the numerous adventurers roaming the land during the first half of the 18th century made the life of the people quite wretched.
india of those days was also a land of contrasts.
extreme poverty existed side by side with extreme riches and luxury.
on the one hand, there were the rich and powerful nobles steeped in luxury and comfort, on the other, backward, oppressed and impoverished peasants living at the bare subsistence level and having to bear all sorts of injustices and inequities even so, the life of the indian masses was by and large better at this time than it was after over 100 years of british rule at the end of the 19th century.
indian agriculture during the 18th century was technically backward and stagnant.
the techniques of production had remained stationary for centuries.
the peasant tried to makeup for technical backwardness by working very hard.
he, in fact, performed miracles of production moreover, he did not usually suffer from shortage of land.. but, unfortu nately, he seldom reaped the fruits of his labour, even though it wa his produce that supported the rest of the society, his own reward was miserably inadequate.
the state, the zamindars, the jagifdars, and the revenuefarmers tried to extract the maximum amount from him.
this was as true of the mughal state as of the maratha or sikh chiefs or other successors of the mughal state.
even though indian villages were largely selfsufficient and imported little from outside and the means of communication were backward, extensive trade within the country and between india and other countries of asia and europe was carried on under the mughals.
india imported pearls, raw silk, wool, dates, dried fruits, and rose water 36 modern india from the persian gulf region coffee, gold, drugs, and honey from arabia tea, sugar, porcelain, and silk from china goid, musk and woollen cloth from tibet tin from singapore spices, perfumes, arrack, and sugar from the indonesian islands ivory and drugs from africa and woollen cloth, metals such as copper, iron, and lead, and paper from europe.
indias most important article of export was cotton textiles which were famous all over the world for their excellence and were in demand everywhere.
india also exported raw silk and silk fabrics, hardware, indigo, saltpetre, opium, rice, wheat, sugar, pepper and other spices, precious stones, and drugs, since india was on the whole selfsufficient in handicrafts and agricultural products, it did not import foreign goods on a large scale.
on the other hand, its industrial and agricultural products had a steady market abroad, consequently, it exported more than it imported and its trade was balanced by import of silver and gold.
in fact, india was known as a sink of precious metals, constant warfare and disruption of law and order in many areas during the 18th century harmed the countrys internal trade and disrupted its foreign trade to some extent and in some directions.
many trading centres were looted by the contestants for power and by foreign invaders.
many of the trade routes were infested with organised bands of robbers, and traders and their caravans were regularly looted.
even the road between the two1 imperial cities, delhi and agra, was made unsafe by the marauders.
moreover, with the rise of autonomous provincial regimes and innumerable local chiefs, the number of custom houses or chowkies grew by leaps and bounds.
every petty or large ruler tried to increase his income by imposing heavy customs duties on goods entering or passing through1 his territories.
all these factors had an injurious effect on trade though much less than generally believed.
the impoverishment of the nobles, who were the largest consumers of luxury products in which trade was conducted, also injured internal trade.
political factors which hurt trade also adversely affected urban industries.
many prosperous cities, centres of flourishing industry, were sacked and devastated.
delhi was plundered by nadir shah lahore, delhi and mathura by ahmad shah abdali agra by the jats surat and other cities of gujarat and the deccan by maratha chiefs sarhind by the sikhs, and so on.
similarly, artisans catering to the needs of the feudal class and the court suffered as the fortunes of their patrons declined.
the decline of internal and foreign trade also hit them hard in some parts of the country.
nevertheless, some industries in other parts of the country gained as a result of expansion in trade with europe due to the activities of the european trading companies.
even so india remained a land of extensive manufactures.
indian artisans still enjoyed fame all the world over for their skill.
india was still a largescale manufacturer of cotton and silk fabrics, sugar, jute, dyestuffs, mineral and metallic products like arms, metal wares, and saltpetre and oils.
the important centres of textile industry were dacca and murshidabad in bengal, patna in bihar, surat, ahmedabad and broach in gujarat, chanderi in madhya pradesh, burhanpur in maharashtra, jaunpur, varanasi, lucknow, and agra in u.p., multan and lahore m the punjab, masulipatam, aurangabad, chicacole and vishakha patnam in andhra, bangalore in mysore, and coimbatore and indian states and society in the 18th century 37 madurai in madras.
kashmir was a centre of woollen manufactures.
ship building industry flourished in maharashtra, andhra, and bengal.
writing about the great skill of indians in this respect, an english observer wrote in ship building they probably taught the english far more than they learr.t from them.
the european companies bought many indianmade ships for their use.
in fact, at the dawn of the 18th century, india was one of the main centres of worjd trade and industry, peter the great of russia was led to exclaim bear in mind that the commerce of id dials the commerce of the world and.., .he who can exclusively command it is the dictator of europe.
education education was not completely neglected in 18 th century india, but it was on the whole defective.
it was traditional and out of touch with the rapid developments in the west.
the knowledge which it imparted was confined to literature, law, religion, philosophy, and logic, and excluded the study of physical and natural sciences, technology, and geography.
nor did it concern itself with a factual and rational study of society.
in all fields original thought was discouraged and reliance placed on ancient learning.
the centres of higher education were spread all over the country and were usually financed by nawabs, rajas, and rich zamindars.
among 38 modern india baaed upon survey of india map with the permission of the surveyor of india.
ttie territorial waters of india extend into the to a distance of twelve miicn measured from the appropriate base line.
the hindus, higher education was based op sanskrit learning and was mostly confined to brahmins.
persian education being based on the official language of the time was equally popular among hindus and muslims.
elementary education was quite widespread.
among the hindus it was imparted through town and village schools while among the muslims through  govrmment of india copyri indian states and society in the 18th century 39 the maulvis in maktabs situated in mosques.
in those schools the young students were taught reading, writing, and arithmetic, though elementary education was mostly confined to the higher castes like brah mnx, rajputs, and vaishyas, many persons from the lower castes also often received it.
interestingly enough, the average literacy was not less than what it was under the british later.
though the standard of primary education was inadequate by modern standards, it sufficed for the limited purposes of those days.
a very pleasant aspect of education then was that the teachers enjoyed high prestige in the community.
a bad feature of it was that girls were seldom given education, though some women of the higher classes were an exception.
sods and cultural life social life and culture in the 18th century were marked by stagnation and dependence on the past.
there was, of course, no uniformity of culture and social patterns all over the country.
nor did all hindus and all muslims form two distinct societies.
people were divided hy religion, region, tribe, language, and caste.
moreover, the social life and culture of the upper classes, who formed a tiny minority of the total population, was in manyrespects different from the life and culture of the lower classes.
caste was the central feature of the social life of the hindus.
apart from the four varnas, hindus were divided into numerous castes jatis which differed in their nature from place to place.
the caste system  rigidly divided people and permanently fixed their place in the social scale.
the higher castes, headed by the brahmins, monopolised all social prestige and privileges.
caste rules were extremely rigid.
intercaste marriages were forbidden.
there were restrictions on inter dining among members of different castes.
in some cases persons belonging to higher castes would not take food touched by persons of the lower castes.
castes often determined the choice of profession, though exceptions did occur.
caste regulations were strictly enforced by caste councils and paqchayats and caste chiefs through fines, penances prayaschitya and expulsion from the caste.
caste was a major divisive force and element of disintegration in the india of 18th century.
it oftensplit hindus living in the same village or region into many social atoms.
it was, of course, possible for a person to acquire a higher social status by acquisition of high office or power, as did the holkar family in the i8th century.
sometimes, though not often, an entire caste would succeed in raising itself in the caste hierarchy.
muslims were no less divided by considerations of caste, race, tribe, and status, even though their religion enjoined social equality.
the shia and sunni nobles were sometimes at loggerheads on account of their religious differences.
the irani, afghan, turani, and hindustani muslim nobles and officials often stood apart from each other.
a large number of hindus converted to islam carried their caste into the new religion and observed its distinctions, though not as rigidly as before.
moreover, the sharif muslims consisting of nobles, scholars, 40 modern india priests, and army officers, looked down upon the ajlaf muslims or the lower class muslims in a manner similar to that adopted by the higher caste hindus towards the lower caste hindus.
the family system in the 18th century india was primarily patriarchal, that is, the family was dominated by the senior male member and inheritance was through the male line.
in kerala, however, the family was matnlineal.
outside kerala, women were subjected to nearly complete male control.
they were expected to live as mothers and wives only, though in these roles they were shown a great deal of respect and honour.
even during war and anarchy women were seldom molested and were treated with respect.
a european traveller, abbe j.a.
dubois, commented, at the beginning of the 19th century a hindu woman can go anywhere alone, even in the most crowded places, and she need never fear the impertinent looks and jokes of idle loungers  a house inhabited solely by women is a sanctuary which the most shameless libertine would not dream of violating.
but the women, of the time possessed little individuality of their own.
this does not mean that there were no exceptions to this rule.
ahilya bai administered indore with great success from 1766 to 1796. , many other hindu and muslim ladies played important roles in 18th century politics.
whie women of the upper classes were not supposed to work outside their homes, peasant women usually worked in the fields and women of the poorer classes often worked outside their homes to supplement the family income.
the purdah was common mostly among the higher classes in the north it was not practised in the south.
, boys and girls were not permitted to mix with each other.
all marriages were arranged by the heads of the families, men were permitted to have more than oije wife, but, .except for the welloff, they normally had oniy one.
on the other hand a woman was expected to marry only once in her lifetime.
the custom of early marriage prevailed all over the country.
sometimes chjldrn were married when they were only three or four years of age.
indian states and society in the 18th century 41 among the upper classes, the evil customs of incurring heavy expenses on marriages and of giving dowry to the bride prevailed.
the evil of dowry was especially widespread in bengal and rajputana.
in maharashtra it was curbed to some extent by the energetic steps taken by the peshwas.
two great social evils of the 18th century india, apart from the caste system, were the custom of sati and the condition of widows.
sali involved the rite of a hindu widow burning herself along with the body of her dead husband.
it was mostly prevalent in rajputana, bengal and other parts of northern india.
in the south it was uncommon and the marathas did not encourage it.
even in rajputana and bengal it was practised only by the families of rajas, chiefs, big zamindars and upper castes.
widows belonging to the higher classes and higher bastes could not remarry, though in some regions and in some castes, fop exampk, among nonbrahmins in maharashtra, the jats and people of the hil regions of the north, widow remarriage was quite common.
the loi of the hindu widow was usually pitiable.
there were all sorts of restrictions on her clothing, diet, movements, etc.
in general, she was expected to renounce all the pleasures of the earth and to serve selflessly the members of her husbands or her brothers family, depending on where she spent the remaining years of her life.
sensitive indians were often touched by the hard and harsh life of the widows.
raja sawai jai singh of amber and the maratha general prashuram bhau tried to promote widow remarriage but failed.
culturally, india showed signs of exhaustion during the 18th century.
cultural sati a widqw being burnt on her husbands pyre courtesy national archives of india, new delhi 42 modern india continuity with the preceding centuries was, of course, maintained.
but at the same time culture remained wholly traditionalist.
cultural activities of the time were mostly financed by the royal 1 court, rulers, and nobles and chiefs whose impoverishment led to their gradual neglect.
the most rapid decline occurred precisely in those branches of arts which depended on the patronage of kings, princes, and nobles.
this was true most of all of mughal architecture and painting.
many of the painters of the mughal school migrated to provincial courts and flourished at hyderabad, lucknow, kashmir, and patna.
at the same time new schools of painting were born and achieved distinct ion.
the paintings of kangra and rajput schools revealed new vitality and taste.
in the field of architecture, the imambara of lucknow reveals proficiency in technique but a decadence in architectural taste.
on the other hand, the city of jaipur and its buildings ate an example of continuing vigour.
music continued to develop and flourish in the 18th century.
significant progress was made in this field in the tcigu of muhammad shah.
poruv in nsariy all the indian languages lost its touch with life and became decorative, artificial, mechanical and traditional.
its pessimism reflected ths prevailing sense of despair and cynicism, while its content reflected the impoverishment of the spiritual life of its patrons, the feudal nobles and kings, a noteworthy feature of the literary life of the 18th century was the spread of urdu language and the vigorous growth of urdu poetry.
urdu gradually became the medium of social intercourse among the upper classes of northern india.
while urdu poetry shared, in common the weaknesses of the contemporary literature in other indian languages, it produced brilliant poets like mir, sauda, nazir, and in the 19th century, that great genius mirza ghalib.
similarly, there was a revival of malayalam literature, especially under the patronage of the travancore rulers, martanda varma and rama varma.
one of the great poets of kerala, kunchan nambiar, who wrote popular poetry in the language of daily usage, lived at this time.
the 18th century kerala also witnessed the full development of kathakali literature, dramaand dance.
the padmanabhan palace with its remarkable architecture and mural paintings was also constructed in thq 18th centuiy.
tayaumanavar 170644 was one of the best exponents of sittar poetry in tamil 3n line with other slitar poets, he protested against the abuses of temple nile and the caste system.
in assam, literature developed under the patronage of the ahom kings.
dayaram, cue of the great lyricists of gujarat, wrote during the second half of the 18th century.
beet ranjha, the famous romantic epic in punjabi, was composedat this time by warris shah.
for sindhi literature, the 18th century was a period of enormous achievement.
shah abdul latif composed his famous collection of poems, risalo.
sachal and sami were the other great sindhi poets of the century.
the main weakness of indian culture lay in the field of science.
throughout the 18th century india remained far behind the west in science and technology.
for the last 200 years western europe had been undergoing a scientific and indian states and society in the 18th century 43 economic revolution that was leading to a spate of inventions and discoveries.
the scientific outlook was gradually pervading the western mind and revolutionising the philosophic, political, and economic outlook of the europeans and their institutions.
on the other hand, the indians who had in earlier ages made vital contributions in the fields of mathematics and natural sciences, had been neglecting the sciences for several centuries, the indian mind was still tied to tradition boih the nobles and the commo n people were superstitious to a high degree.
the indians remained almost wholly ignorant of the scientific, cultural, political, and economic achievements of the west.
the 18th century indian rulers did not show any interest in things western except in weapons of war and techniques of military training.
this weakness in the realm of science was to a large extent responsible for the total subjugation of india by the most advanced country of the time, struggle for power and wealth, economic decline, social backwardness, and cultural stagnation had a deep and harmful impact on the morals of a section of the indian people.
the nobles, in particular, degenerated m their private and public, life.
the virtues of loyalty, gratitude, and faithfulness to their pledged word tended to disappear in the singleminded pursuit of selfish aims.
many of the nobles were prey to degrading vices and excessive luxury.
most of them took bribes when in office.
surprisingly enough, the common people were not debased to any marked extent.
they continued to exhibit a high degree of personal integrity and morality.
for example, the well known british official john malcolm remarked in 1821 i do not know, the example of any great population, in similar circumstaikw, preserving through such  period of changes and tyrannical rule, so nuch virtue and so many .qualities as are to be found la a great proportion of the inhabitant of his country.
in particular, he praised the absence of the common vices ohheft, drunkenness, and violence., similarly, cranford, another european writer, observed 44 modhrn india.
their rolea of morality are most benevolent and hospitality and charity arc not only strongly inculcated but i believe nowhere more universally practised than amongst hindus.
friendly relations between hindus and muslims were a very hejthy feature of life in 18th.
century india.
even though the nobles and chiefs of the time fought each other incessantly, their fights and their alliances were seldom based on distinctions of religion.
in other words, their politics were essentially secular.
in fact, there was little communal bitterness or religious intolerance in the country.
all people, high or low, respected one anothers relijion and a spirit of tolerance, even harmony, prevailed.
the mutual relations of hindus and muslims were those of brothers among brothers.
this was particularly true of the common people in the villages and towns who fully shared one anothers joys and sorrows, irrespective of religious affiliations.
hindus and muslims cooperated in nonreligious sphere s such as social life and cultural affairs.
the evolution of a composite hindumuslim culture, ot of common ways and attitudes, continued unchecked.
hindu writers often wrote in persian while muslim writers wrote in hindi, bengali, and other vernaculars, often dealing with subjects of hindu social life and religioln, such as radha and krishna, sita and ram, and nal and damyanti.
the development of urdu language and literature provided a new meeting ground between hindus and muslims.
even in tbe religious sphere, the mutual influence and respect that had been developing in the last few centuries as a result of the spread of the bhakti movement among hindus and sufism among muslims, continued to grow.
a large number of hindus worshipped muslim saints and many muslims showed equal veneration for hindu gods and saints.
muslim rulers, nobles, and commoners joyfully joined in the hindu festivals such as holi, diwali, and idurga puja,1 just as hindus participated in the muharram processions.
it is noteworthy that raja rammohun roy, the greatest indian of the first half of the 19th century, was influenced in an equal measure by the hindu and the islamic philosophical and religious systems.
it may also be noted that religious affiliation was not the main point of departure in cultural and social life.
the ways of life of the upper class hindus and muslims converged much more than the ways of life of upper class and lower class hindtis or of upper class and lower class muslims.
similarly, regions or areas provided points of departure.
people of one region had far greater cultural synthesis irrespective of religion than people following tbe same religion spread over different regions.
people living in the villages also tended to have a different pattern of social and cultural life than that of the town dwellers.
e x e r c i s e s 1. examine the policies followed by the rulers of the states of hyderabad, bengal, and avadh.
indian states and society in the 18th century 45 2. give a critical appreciation of the character and achievements of tipu sultan.
3. trace the rise of the sikhs in the punjab in the 18th century.
discuss ranjit singhs administration of the punjab.
4. trace the rise of the maratha empire under the first three peshwas why did it fail to survive 5. bring out the main features of indian economic life in the 18th century.
to what extent were they related to contemporary political developments 6. what were the main features of social lire in india in the lbth century bring out some of the differences between the lower and the higher classes and castes in this respect.
7. discuss the major cultural developments in india in the 18th century.
how far were these developments influenced by the nobles, chiefs, and kings 8. briefly examine hindumuslim relations in the 18th century.
to what extent were the politics of the 18th century motivated by religious considerations 9. write short notes on a raja jai singh of amber, b the third battle of panipat, c 1 haidar ah, d kerala in the 18th century, e the jat state of bharatpur, f education in 18th century india, g science in 18th century india, h economic condition of the peasant in the 18th century.
46 modern india bated upon survey of india map wiih the permission of the surveyor general of india.
the territorial waters of india extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles nyasured from the appropriate base line.
government of india copyright 1982 chapter iii the beginnings of european settlements ndias trade relations with europe go back to the ancient days of the greeks.
during the middle ages trade between europe and india and south east asia was carried on along several loutes.
one was by sea along the persian gulf, and from there overland dirough iraq and turkey, and then again by sea to venice and genoa.
a second was via the red sea and then overland to alexandria in egypt and front there by sea to venice and genoa.
a third, less frequented overland route lay through the passes of the northwest frontier of india, across central asia, and russia to the baltic.
the asian part of the trade was carried on mostly by arab merchants and sailors, while the mediterranean and european part was the virtual monopoly of the italians.
goods from asia to europe passed through many states and many hands.
every state levied tolls and duties while every merchant made a substantial profit, there were many other obstacles, such as pirates and natural calamities on the way.
yet the trade remained highly profitable.
this was mostly due to the pressing demand of the people of europe for eastern spices which fetched high prices in european markets.
the europeans needed spices because they lived on salted and peppered meat during the winter months, when there was little grass to feed the cattle, and only a liberal use of spices could make this meat palatable.
consequently, european food was as highly spiced as indian food till the 17th century, the old trading routes between the east and the west came under turkish control after the ottoman conquest of asia minor and the capture of constantinople in 1453. moreover, the merchants of vcnlce and genoa monopolised the trade between europe and asia and refused to let the new nation states of western europe, particularly spain and portugal, have any share in the trade through these old routes.
but the trade with india and indonesia was too highly priced by the west europeans to be so easily given up.
the demand for spices was pressing and the profits to be made in their trade inviting.
the reputedly fabulous wealth of india was an additional attraction as there was an acute shortage of gold all oyer europe, and gold was essential os a medium of exchange if trade was to grow unhampered.
the west european states and merchants therefore began to search for new and safer sea routes to india and the spice islands of indonesia, then known as the east indies.
they wanted to break the arab and venetian trade monopolies, to bypass turkish hostility, and to open direct trade relations with the east.
they were wellequipped to do so as great advances in shipbuilding and i 48 modern india the science of navigation had taken place during the 15th century.
moreover, the renaissance had generated a great spirit of adventure among the people of western europe.
tbe first steps were taken by portugal and spain whose seamen, sponsored and controlled by their governments, began a great era of geographical discoveries.
in 1494, columbus of spain set out to reach india and discovered america instead.
in 1498, vasco da gama of portugal discovered a new and allsea route from europe to india.
he sailed round africa via the cape of good hope and reached calicut.
he returned with a cargo which sold for 60 times the cost of his voyage.
these and other navigational discoveries opened a new chapter in the history of the world.
adam smith wrote later that the discovery of america itnd the cape route to india were the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind.
the 17th and 18th centuries were to witness an enormous increase in world trade.
the vast new continent of america was opened to europe and relations between europe and asia were completely transformed.
the new continent was rich in precious metals.
its gold and silver poured into europe where they powerfully stimulated trade and provided some of the capital which was soon to make european nations the most advanced in trade, industry and science.
moreover, america was to provide an inexhaustible market for european manufacturers.
another major source of early capital accumulation or enrichment for european countries was their penetration of africa in the middle of the 15th century.
in the beginning, gold and ivory of africa had attracted the foreigner.
very soon, however, trade with africa centred around the slave trade.
in the 16th century this trade was a monopoly of spain and portugal.
later it was dominated by dutch, french and british merchants year after year, particularly after 1650, thousands of africans were sold as slaves in the west indies and in north and south america.
the slave ships carried manufactured goods from europe to africa, exchanged them on the coast of africa for negroes, took these slaves across the atlantic and exchanged them for the colonial produce of plantations or mines, and finally brought back and sold this produoe in europe.
it was on the immense profits of this triangular trade that the commercial supremacy of england and france was to be based.
the demand for slaves on the sugar, cotton and tobacco plantations and mines of the western hemisphere was inexhaustive as the hard conditions of work and inhuman treatment of the slaves led to high mortality.
moreover, the limited population of europe could not have supplied the cheap labour needed for the full exploitation of the land and mines of the new world, while no exact record of the number of africans sold into slavery exists, historians estimate has ranged between 15 and 50 millions.
while loss of people on a massive scale led to the crippling of african countries and societies, a great deal of west european and north american prosperity was based on the slave trade and the plantations worked by slave labour.
moreover, profits of slave trade and slaveworked plantations provided some of the capital which financed the industrial revolution in the 18th and 19th centuries.
a similar the beginnings op european settlements 49 role was later played by the wealth extracted from india.
slavery was later abolished in the 19th century after it had ceased to play an important economic role, but it was openly defended and praised as long as it was profitable.
monarch, ministers, members of parlia ment, dignitaries of the church, leaders of public opinion, and merchants and industrialists supported the slave trade.
for example, in britain, queen elizabeth, george iii, edmund burke, nelson, gladstone, disraeli and carlyle were some of the defenders and apologists of slavery.
in the 16th century, european merchants and soldiers also began the long process of first penetrating and then subjecting asian lands to their control.
in the process, the prosperity of the italian towns and merchants wab destroyed as commerce and then political power gradually shifted westward towards the atlantic coast.
portoga.1 had a monopoly of the highly profitable eastern trade for nearly a century.
in india, she established her trading settlements at cochin, goa, dlu, and daman.
from the beginning the portuguese combined the use of force with trade.
in this they were helped by he superiority of their armed ships which enabled them to dominate the seas.
a handful of portuguese soldiers and sailors could maintain their position on the seas against the much more powerful land powers of india and asia.
beside, they also saw that they could take advantage of the mutual rivalries of the indian princes to strengthen their position.
they intervened in the conflict between the ruler of calicut and cochin to establish their trading centres and forts on the malabar coast from here they attacked and destroyed arab shipping, brutally killing hundreds of arab merchants and seameh, by threatening mughal shipping, they sflso succeeded jn securing many trading concessions from the mughal empfors, under the viceroyalty of alfanso d albuquerque, who captured goa in 3j0 the portuguese established their domination over hie entire asian coast from hormuz in the persian gulf to malacca in malaya and the spice islands in indonesia.
they seized indian territories on the coast and waged constant war to expand their trade and dominions and safeguard their trade monopoly from their european rivals, nor did they shy away from piracy and plunder.
in the words of james mill, the famous british historian of the 19th century the portuguese followed their merchandise as their chief occupation, but like the english and the dutch .. of the same period, had no objection to plunder, when it fell in their way.
the portuguese were intolerant and fanatical in religious matters.
they indulged in forcible conversion offering people the alternative of christianity or sword.
their approach in this respect was particularly hateful to people of india where religious tolerance was the rule.
they also indulged in inhuman cruelties and lawlessness.
in spite of their barbaric behaviour their possessions in india survived for a century because they enjoyed control over the high seas, their soldiers and administrators maintained strict discipline, and they did not have to face the might of the mughal empire as south india was outside mughal influence.
they clashed with the mughal power in bengal in 1631 and were driven out of their settlement at hugli.
their hold over the arabian sea had 50 modern india already been weakened by the english and their influence in gujarat had become negligible by this time.
portugal was, however, incapable of maintaining for long its trade monopoly or its dominions in the east.
its population was less than a million, its court was autocratic and decadent, its merchants enjoyed much less power and prestige than its landed aristocrats, it lagged behind in the development of shipping, a d it followed a poliey of religious intolerance.
the portuguese and the spanish had left the english and the dutch far behind during the 15th century and the first half of the 16th century.
but, in the latter half of the 16th century, england and holland, and later france, all growing commercial and naval powers, waged a fierce struggle against the spanish and portuguese monopoly of world trade.
in this struggle the latter had to go under.
portugal had become a spanish dependency in 1580. in 1588 the english defeated the spanish fleet called the armada and shattered spanish naval supremacy for ever.
this enabled the english nd the dutch merchants to use the cape of good hope route to india and so to join in the race for empire in the east.
in the end, the dutch gained control over indonesia and the british over india,, ceylon, and malaya.
the dutch had toe long been dealing in eastern produce which they bought in portugal and sold all over northern europe.
this had fed them to develop better ships, scientific sailing techniques, and efficiept business methods and organisation.
their revolt against the spanish domination of their homeland, the netherlands, and portugals merger with spain mads them look for alternative sources of spices.
in 1595, four dutch ships sailed to india via the cape of good hope.
in 1602, the dutch east india company was formed and the dutch states general the dutch parliament gave it a charter empowering it to make war, conclude treaties, acquire territories and build fortresses.
the main interest of the dutch lay not in india but in the indonesian islands of java, sumatra, and the spice islands where spices were produced.
they soon turned out the portuguese from the malay straits and the indonesian islands and, in 1623, defeated english attempts to establish themselves there.
it appeared at the time that the dutch had successfully seized the most important profitable part of asian trade.
they did not, however, entirely abandon indian trade.
they also established trading depots at surat, broach, cambay, and ahmedabad in gujarat in west india, cochin in kerala, nagapatam in madras, masulipatam in andhra, chinsura in bengal, patna in bihar, and agra in uttar pradesh.
in 1658 they also conquered ceylon from the portuguese.
they exported indigo, raw silk, cotton textiles, saltpetre, and opium from india.
like the portuguese they treated the people of india cruelly and exploited them ruthlessly.
the english merchants too looked greedily on the asian trade.
the success of the portuguese, the rich cargoes of spices, calicoes, silk, gold, pearls, drugs, porcelain,and ebony they carried, and the high profits they made inflamed the imagination of the merchants of england and made them impatient to participate in such profitable commerce.
but, till the end of the 16th century, they wcto too weak to challenge the naval might of portugal and spain.
for over 50 years they the beginnings op european settlements 51 searched without success for an alternative passage to india.
meanwhile they gathered strength on the sea.
in 1579, drake sailed around the world.
in 1588, the defeat of the spanish armada led to the opening of the seapassage to the east.
an english association or company to trade with the east .was formed in 1599 under the auspices of a group of merchants known as the merchant adventurers.
the company was granted a royal charter and the exclusive privilege to trade in the east by queen elizabeth on 31 december 1600 and was popularly known as the east india company.
from the beginning, it was linked with the monarchy queen elizabeth 15581603 was one of the shareholders of the company.
the first voyage of the bnglish east india company was made in 1601 when its ships sailed to the spice islands of indonesia.
in 1608 it decided to open a factory,.the name given at the time to a trading depot, at surat on the west coast of india and sent captain hawkins to jahangirs court to obtain royal favours.
initially, hawkins was received in a friendly manner.
he was given a man sab of 400 and a jagir.
later, he was expelled from agra as a result of portuguese intrigue.
this .convinced the english of the need to overcome portuguese influence at the mughal court if they were to obtain any concessions from the imperial government.
they defeated a portuguese naval squadron at swally near surat in 1612 and then again in 3 614. these victories led the mughals to hope that in view of their naval weakness they could use the english to counter the portuguese on the sea.
moreover, the indian merchants would certainly benefit by competition among their foreign buyers.
consequently, the english company was given permission by a royal farman to open factories at several places on he west coast.
the english were not satisfied with this concession.
in 1615 their ambassador sir thomas roe reached the mughal court.
they also exerted pressure on the mughal authorities by taking advantage of indias naval weakness and harassing indian traders and shipping to the red sea and to mecca.
thus, combining entreaties with threats, roe succeeded in getting an imperial farman to trade and establish factories in all parts of the mughal empire.
roes success further angered the portuguese and a fierce naval battle between the two countries began in 1620. it ended in english victory.
hostilities between the two came to an end in 1630. in 1662 the portuguese gave the island of bombay to king charles ii of england as dowryfor marrying a portuguese princess.
eventually, the portuguese lost alt their possessions in india except goa, din and daman.
the dutch, the english, and the marathas beflefitted, the marathas capturing salsette and bassein in 1739. the english company fell out with the dutch company over division of the spice trade of the indonesian islands.
ultimately, the dutch nearly expelled the english from the trade of the spice islands and the latter were compelled to concentrate on india where the situation was more favourable to them the intermittent war in india between the1 two powers, which had begun in 1654, ended in 1667, when the english gave up all claims to indonesia while the dutch agreed to leave alone the english settlements in 52 modern india india.
the english, however, continued.
their efforts to drive out the dutch from the indian trade and by 1795 hey had expelled the dutch from their last possession in india.
the groih of he east india companys trade and influence, 1w01744 the english east company had vety humble beginnings in india.
surat was the centre of its trade till 1687. throughout this period the english remained petitioners before the mughal authorities.
by 1623 the had established factories at surat, broach, ahmedabad, agra, and masulipatam.
from the very beginning, the english trading company tried to combine trade and diplomacy with war and control of the territory where their factories were situated.
in fact, already in 161v roe had given to the english authorities tbe advice that was to jay the pattern tot future british relations with india.
assure you, he wrote, i know these people are best treated with the sword in one hand and the caducean a rod carried by a messenger in the other.
he added that the english should depend upon the same ground that we began and by which we subsist, feaf.
in 1625 the companys authorities at surat made an attempt to fortify their factory but the chiefs of the english factory were immediately imprisoned and put in irons by the local authorities of the mughal empire which was still in its vigour.
similarly, when the companys english rivals made piratical attacks on mughal shipping, the mughal authorities imprisoned in retaliation the president of the company at surat and members of his council and released them only on payment of  18,000. conditions in the south were more favourable to the english as they did not a view of the city of surat in the early seventeenth century courtesy national archives of india, new dtthl the beginnings op european settlements 53 have to face a strong indian government there.
the great vijaya ngar kingdom had been overthrown in 1565 and its place taken by a number of petty and weak states, it was easy to appeal to their greed or overawe them with armed strength.
the english opened their first factory in the south at masulipatam in 1611. but they soon shifted the centre of their activity to madras the lease of which was granted to thczn by the local raja in 1639. madras was then a strip of coastal territgjry six miles long and one mile broad.
the raja authorised them td fortify he place, to administer it, and to coin money on condition of payment to him of half of the customs revenue of the port.
here the english built a small fort around their factory called1 fort st. george.
by the end ofthe 17th  century the english company was claiming ftill sovereignty over madras and was ready to fight in, defence of the claim.
interestingly enough, from the very beginning this company of profit seeking merchants was also determined to make indians pay for the conquest of their own country.
for example, the court of directors of the company wrote to the madras authorities in 1683 would have you to .strengthen, and fortify our fort and town madras by degrees, that it may be terrible against the asault of any indian prince and tbe dutch power of india .
.
.
.
but we mutt needs desire you so to continue your bosincaa but with all gentleness that tbe inhabitants may pay the full charge of all repairs and fortifications ....................................................................................................... the island of bombay was acquired by the east indiacompany from portugal in 1668 and was immediately fortified.
in bombay the english found a large and easily defended port for thatreaon, and because english trade was threatened at the time by the rising maratha power, bombay soon superceded surat as the headquarters of the company on the west coast.
in eastern india, the english company had opened its first factories hi orissa in 1633. in 1651 it was given permission to trade at hugti in bengal.
it soon opened factories at patna.
balasore, paoca and other places in bengal and bihar.
fort st, george, madm caurttty arcjtatalogical survey of iwtfta, new delhi 54 modern india it now desired that in bengal too it should have an independent settlement.
moreover, their easy success in trade and in establishing independent and fortified settlements at madras and at bombay, and the preoccupation of aurangzeb with the antimaratha campaigns led the english to abandon the role of humble petitioners.
they now dreamt of establishing political power in india which woild enable them to compel the mughals to allow them a free hand in trade, to force indians to sell cheap and buy dear, to keep the rival european traders out, and to make their trade independent of the policies of the indian powers.
political power would also make it possible for them to appropriate indian revenues and thus to conquer the country wilh its own resources, such plans were explicitly put forward at the time.
the governor of bombay, gerald aungier, wrote to the directors of the company in london, the time now lequfres you to manage your genal commerce with the sword in your hands, in 1687, the directors advied the governor of madras to establish such a policy of civil and military power and create and secure such a luge revenue to maintain both as may be the foundation of a large, well grounded, secure english dominion in india for all lime to come.
in 1689 they declared the increase of our revenue is the subject of our care, as much as our trade tis that mist maintain our force, when twenty accidents may interrupt our trade tis that miut make us a nation in india ............................................................. hostilities between the english and the mughal emperor broke out in 1686 after the former had sacked hugli and declared war on the emperor.
but the english had seriously miscalculated the situation and underestimated mughal strength.
the mughal empire under aurangzeb was even now more than a match for the petty forces of the east india company.
the war ended disastrously for them.
they were driven out of their factories in bengal and compelled to seek refuge in a feverstrickcn island at the mouth of the ganga.
their factories at surat, masulipatam, and vizagapataoi were seized and their fort at bombay besciged.
having discovered that they were not yet strong enough to fight the mughal power, the english once again became humble petitioners and submitted that the ill crimes they have done may be pardoned.
they expressed their willingness to trade under the protection of the indian rulers.
obviously, they had learnt their lesson.
once again they relied on flattery and humble entreaties to get trading concessions from the mughal emperor.
the mughal authorities readily pardoned the english folly as they had no means of knowing that these hannlesslooking foreign traders would one day pose a serious threat to the country, instead they recognised that foreign trade carried on by the company benefited indian artisans and merchants and thereby enriched the state treasury.
moreover, the 55 modern thdta english, though weak on land, were, because of their navat supremacy, capable of completely ruining indian trade and shipping to iran, west asia, northern and eastern africa and east asia.
aurangzeb therefore permitted them to resume trade on payment of rs.
150,000 as compensation.
in 1691 the company was granted exemption from the payment of custom duties in bengal in return for rs.
3,000 a year.
in 1698, the company acquired the zamindari of the three villages sutanati, kalikata, and govindpur where it built fort william around its factory.
the villages boon grew into a city which came to be known as calcutta.
in 1717 the company secured from emperor farrukh siyar a farman confirming .the privileges granted in 1691 and extending them to gujarat and the deccan.
but during the first half of the 18th century bengal was ruled by strong nawabs such as murshid quli khan and alivardi khan.
they exercised strict control over the english traders and prevented them from misusing their privileges.
nor did they allow them to strengthen fortifications at calcutta or to rule the city independently.
here the east india company remained a mere zamindar of the nawab, even though the political ambitions of the company were frustrated, its commercial affairs flourished as never before.
its imports from india into england increased from  500,000 in 1708 to  1,795,000 in 1740. this increase was recorded in spite of the fact that the english government forbad the use of indian cotton and silk textiles iii england in order to protect the english textile industry and to prevent export of silver from england to tndia.
thus at a jime when the english were pleading for free trade in india they were restricting freedom of trade in their own country and denying access to indian manufactures.
british settlements in madras, bombay, and calcutta became the nuclei of flourishing cities.
large numbers of indian merchants and bankers were attracted to these cities.
this was due partly to the new commercial opportunities available in these cities and partly to the unsettled conditions and insecurity outside them, caused by the breakup of the mughal empire.
by the middle of the 18 th century, the population of madras had increased to 300,000, of calcutta to 200,000 and of bombay to 70,000. it should also be noted that these three cities contained fortified english settlements they also had immediate access to the sea where english naval power remained far superior to that of the indians.
in case of conflict with any indian authority, the english could always escape from these cities to the sea.
and when a suitable opportunity arose for them to take advantage of the political disorders m the country, they could use these strategic cities as springboards for the conquest of india.
the internal organisation of the company the charter of 1600 granted the east india company the exclusive privilege of trading east of the cape of good hope for a period of 15 years.
the charter provided for the management of the company by a committee consisting of a governor, a deputygovernor, and 24 members to be elected by a general body of the merchants forming the company.
this committee later on came to be known as the court of directors and its members as directors.
the east indian company soon became the most important trading company of england.
between 1601 and 1612 its rate of profit came to nearly 20 per cent per 56 modern india annum.
its profits were derived both from trade and from piracy, there being no clear dividing line between the two at the time.
in 1612 the company made a profit of  1,000,000 on a capital of  200,000. during the entire 17th century the rate of profit was very high.
but the company was a strictly closed corporation or a monopoly.
no non member was allowed to trade with the east or to share in its high profits.
however, from the very beginning english manufacturers and those merchants who could not secure a place in the ranks of the monopoly companies carried on a vigorous campaign against royal monopolies like the east india company.
but the monarchs threw their influence behind the big companies who gave heavy bribes to them and to other influential political leaders.
from 1609 to 1676, the company gave loans amounting to  170,000 to charles ii, in return, charles ii granted it a series of charters confirming its previous privileges, empowering it to build forts, raise troops, make war and peace with the powers of the east, and authorising its servants in india to administer justice to ail englishmen and others living in english settlements.
thus the company acquired extensive military and judicial powers.
many english merchants continued to trade in asia in spite of the monopoly of the east india company.
they called themselves free merchants while the company called them interlopers.
these interlopers in the end compelled the company to take them into partnership, a change of fortunes occurred in 1688 when parliament became supreme in england as a result of the revolution of 1688 which overthrew the stuart king james ii and invited william iii and his wife mary to be the joint sovereign of britain.
the free merchants now began to press their case on the public and the parliament.
the company defeuded itself by giving heavy bribes to the king, his ministers, and members of the parliament.
in one year alone it spent  80,000 on bribes, giving the king  10,000. in the end, they secured a new charter in 1693. but time was running against the company its success was shortlived.
in 1694, the house of commons passed a resolution that all subjects of england have equal rights to trade in the east indies, unless prohibited by act of parliament.
the rivals of the company founded another company known as the new company.
it gave a loan of  2,000,000 to the government at a time when the old company could offer only  700,000. consequently, the parliament granted the monopoly of trade with the east to the new company.
the old company refused to give up its profitable trade so easily.
it bought large shares in the new company to be able to influence its policies.
at the same time its servants in india refused to let the servants of the new company carry on trade there.
both companies faced ruin as a result of their mutual conflict.
finally, in 1702, the two decided to join forces and together formed a united company.
the new company entitled the limited company of merchants of england trading to the east indies came into existence in 1708. the government and organisation of the companys factories in india as the east india company gradually grew in power and tended to acquire the the beginnings op european settlements 57 status of a sovereign state in india, the organisation of its factories in india too changed and developed accordingly.
a factory of the company was generally a fortified area within which the warehouses stores, offices, and houses of the companys employees were situated.
it is to be noted that no manufacture was carried on in this factory.
the companys servants were divided into three ranks writers, factors, and merchants.
they all lived and dined together as if in a hostel and at companys cost.
a writer was paid 10 pounds 100 rupees a year, a factor 20 to 40 pounds 200 to 400 rupees, and a merchant 40 pounds 400 rupees or a little more.
thus, they were paid very low salaries.
their real income, for which they were so keen to take service in india, came from the permission the company granted them to carry on private trade withirt the country while the trade between india and europe was reserved for the company.
the factory with its trade was administered by a governorincouncil.
the governor was merely the president of the council and had no power apart from the council which took decisions by a majority vote.
the council consisted of senior merchants of the company.
the anglofrench straggle in south india the english east india companys schemes of territorial conquests and political domination, which had been frustrated by aurangzeb at the end of the 17th cfntury,1 were revived during the 1740s because of the visible decline of the mughal power.
nadir shahs invasion had revealed the decay of te central authority.
but there was not much scope for foreign penetration in western india where the vigorous marathas held sway and jn eastern india where allvaicii khan maintained strict control, n southern india, however, conditions were gradually becoming favoui able to foreign adventurers.
while central anthoi ity had disappeared join there after aurangzebs death, the strong hand of n i2amulmulk asaf jah was also withdrawn by nis death in 1748. moreover, the maratha chiefs regularly invaded hyderabad and the rest of the south collecting chaulh.
these raids resulted in politically unsettled conditions and administrative disorganisation.
the carnatic was embroiled m fratricidal wars of succession.
these conditions gave the foreigners an opportunity to expand their political influence and control over the affairs of the soulh indian states.
but the fnghsh were not alone in putting forward commercial and political claims.
while they had, by the end of the 17th century, eliminated their portuguese and dutch rivals, france had appeared as a new rival.
for nearly 20 years from 1744 to 1763 the french and the english were to wage a httter war for control over the trade, wealth, and territory of india.
the french east india company was founded in 1664. it made rapid progress after it was reorganised in the 1720s and soon began to catch up with the english company.
it was firmly established at chander nagore near calcutta and pondicherry on the east coast.
the latter was fully forlilicd.
the french company had some other factories at several ports on the ease and the west coasts.
it had also acquired control over the islands of mauritius and reunion in the indian ocean.
58 modern india the french east india company was heavily dependent on the french government which helped it by giving it treasury grants, subsidies, and bans, and in various other ways.
consequently, it was largely controlled by the government which appointed its directors after 1723. moreover, big shares in the company were held by the nobles and other rentiers who weie more interested in quick dividends than in making the company a lasting commercial success.
so long as the loans and subsidies from the government, enabled the directors to declare dividends, they did not care much about the success or soundness of its commercial ventures.
state control of the company proved harmful to it in another way.
the french state of the time was autocratic, semi feudal, and unpopular and suffeicd from corruption, inefficiency, and instability.
instead of being forwardlooking it was decadent, bound by tradition, and in general unsuited to the times.
control by such a state could not but be injurious to the interests of the company.
tn 1742, war broke out in europe between france and england.
one of the major causes of the war was rivalry over colonies in america.
another was their trade rivalry in india.
this rivalry was intensified by the knowledge that the mughal empire was disintegrating and so the prize of trade or territory was likely to be much bigger than in the past.
anglofrench conflict in india lastedfor nearly 20 years and led to the establishment of british power in india.
the english company was the wealthier of the two because of its superiority in trade.
tt also possessed naval superiority.
moreover, its possessions in india had been held longer and were better fortified and more prosperous.
materially, therefore, the advantage lay with the british.
the war in europe between england and france soon spread to india where the two east india companies clashed with each other.
in 1745, the english navy captured french ships off the southeast coast of india and threatened pondicherry.
dupleix, the french governorgeneral at pondicherry at this time, was a statesman of genius and imagination.
under his brilliant leadership, the french retaliated and occupied madras in 1746. this led to a very important event of the war.
the british appealed to the nawab of carnatic, in whose territory madras was situated, to save their settlement from the french.
the nawab agreed to intervene as he wanted to convince the foreign merchants that he was still the master of his territories, he sent an army against the french to stop the two foreign trading companies from fighting on his soil.
and so the 10,000 strong army of the nawab clashed with a small french force, consisting of 230 europeans and 700 indian soldiers trained along western lines, at st. thome on the banks of the adyar river.
the nawab was decisively defeated.
this battle revealed the immense superiority of western armies over indian armies because of their belter equipment and organisation.
the indian pike was no match for the western musket and bayonet, nor the indian cavalry for the western artillery.
the large but ill disciplined and unwieldly indian armies could not stand up against the smaller but better disciplined western armies.
in 1748, the general war between england and france ended and, as a part of the peace settlement, madras was restored to the english.
though war had ended, the rivalry in trade and over the possessions in india continued and had to be the beginnings op european settlements 59 decided one way or the other.
moreover, the war had revealed to the full the weakness of indian government and armies and thereby fully aroused the cupidity of both the companies for territorial expansion in india.
dupleix now decided to use the lessons he had learnt in the recent war with the nawab of carnatic.
he evolved the strategy of using the well disciplined, modern french army to intervene in the mutual quarrels of the indian princes and, by supporting one against the other, securing monetary, commercial, or territorial favours from the victor.
thus, he planned to use the resources and armies of the local rajas, nawabs, and chiefs to serve the interests of the french company and to expel the english from india.
the only barrier to the success of this strategy could have been the refusal of indian ruters to permit such foreign intervention.
but the indian rulers were guided not by patriotism, but by narrowminded pursuit of personal ambition and gain.
they had little hesitation in inviting the foreigners to help them settle accounts with their internal rivals.
in 174s, a situation arose in the carnatic and hyderabad which gave full scope to dupleixs talents for intrigue.
in the carnatic, chanda snhib began to conspire against the nawab, anwaruddin, while in hyderabad the death of asaf jab, nizamuimulk, was followed by civil war between his son nasir jang and his grandson muzaffar jang.
dupleix seized this opportunity and concluded a secret treaty with chanda sahib and muzaffar jang to help them with his welltrained french and indian forces.
in 1749, the three allies defeated and killed anwaruddin in a battle at ambur.
the latters son, muhammad ali, fled to tnchinopoly.
the rest of the cainatic passed under the dominion of chanda sahib who rewarded the french with a grant of 80 villages around pondicherry.
in hyderabad too, the french were successful.
nasir jang was killed and muzaffar jang became the nizam or viceroy of the dcccan.
the new nizam rewarded the french company by giving it territories near pondicherry as well as the famous town of masuhpatam.
he gave a sum of rs.
500,000 to the company and another rs.
500,000 to its troops.
dupleix received rs.
2,000,000 and a jagir worth rs.
100,000 a year.
moreover, he was made honorary governor of mughal dominions on the east coast from the river krishna to kanya kumari.
dupleix stationed his best officer, bussy, at hyderabad with a french army.
while the ostensible purpose of this arrangement was to protect the nizam from enemies, it was really aimed at maintaining french influence at his court.
while muzaffar jang was marching towards his capital, he was accidentally killed.
bussy immediately raised salabat jang, the third son of nizamulmulk, to the throne.
tn return, the new nizam granted the french the area in andhra known as the northern sarkars, consisting of he four districts of mustafanagar, ellore, rajahmundry, and chicacole.
the french power in south india was now at its height, dupleixs plans had succeeded beyond his dreams.
the french had started out by trying to win indian states as friends they had ended by making them clients or satellites.
but the english had not been silent spectators of their rivals suocesses, to offset french influence and to increase their own, they had been intriguing with 60 modern india nasir jang and muhammad ali.
in 1750, they decided to throw their entire strength behind muhammad ali.
robert clive, a young clerk in the companys service, proposed that french pressure on muhammad ali, besieged at tnchinopoly, could be released by attacking arcot, the capital of carnatic.
the proposal was accepted and clive assaulted and occupied arcot with only 200 english and 300 indian soldiers.
as expected, chanda sahib and the french were compelled to raise the seige of trichinopoly, the french foices were repeatedly defeated.
chanda sahib was soon captured and killed.
the french fortunes were now at an ebb as their army and its generals had proved unequal to their english counterparts.
dupleix made strenuous attempts to reverse the tide of french misfortunes.
but he was given little support by the french government or eveh by the higher authorities of the french east india company.
moreover, the high french officials and military and naval commanders constantly quarrelled with one another and with dupleix.
in the end, the french government, weary of the heavy expense of the war in india and fearing the loss of its american colonies, initiated peace negotiations and agreed in 1754 to the english demand for the recall of dupleix from india.
this was to piove a big blow to the fortunes of the french company in india, the temporary peace between the two companies ended in 1756 when another war between england and fiance broke out.
in the very beginning of the war, the english managed to gain control over bengal.
this has been discussed in the next chapter.
after this event, there was little hope for the french cause in india.
the rich resources of bengal turned the scales decisively in favour of the english.
even though the french government made a determined attempt this time to oust the english from india and sent a strong force headed by count de lally, it was all in vain.
the french fleet was driven off indian waters and the french forces in the carnatic were defeated moreover, the english replaced the french as the nizams protectors and secured from him plasuiipatam and the northern sarkars.
the decisive battle of the wai was fought at wandiwash on 22 january 1760 when the english general eyre coot defeated lally.
within a year the french had lost all their possessions in india the war ended in 1763 with the signing of ihe treaty of paris.
the french factories m india were restored but they could no longei be fortified or even adequately garrisoned with troops.
they could seive only .is centres, of trade and now the french lived in india under british protection their dream of empne in tndia was at an end.
the english, on the other hand, ruled the indian sea.
freed of all european livals.
they could now set about the task of conquering india.
during their struggle with the french and their indian allies the english learnt a few important, and valuable lessons.
firstly, that in the absence of nationalism in the country, they could advance their political schemes by taking advantage of the mutual quarrels of the indian ruleis.
secondly, the western trained infantry, european or indian, armed with modern weapons and backed by artillery could defeat the old style indian armies with ease in pitched battles, thirdly, it was proved that the indian soldier trained ani armed in the european manner made as good a soldier 33 the european and since the indian soldier too lacked a feeling of nationalism, he could he hired and employed by anyone who was willing to pay him well.
the english now set out to create a powerful army consisting of indian soldiers, called the beginnings op european settlements 61 sepoys, and officered by englishmen, with this army as its chief instrument and the vast rcsourccs of indian trade and territories under its command, the english east india company embarked on an era of wars and territorial expansion.
e x e r c i s e s 1. discuss the development of european trade with india from the 15th to 18th centuries.
2. trace the growth of trade of the english east india company and its influence on india from 1500 to 1744, 3. what were the factors which contributed to the anglofrench struggle in south india how did it lead to the subversion of indian political power 4. write short notes on  a the portuguese in india, b trade in spices, c the dutch in india, d aurangzeb and the east india company, e the organisation of the english east india companys factories in india, f dupleix, g the french east india company.
62 modern india based upon survey of india map with the permission of the surveyor general of india, the territorial waters of india extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line.
chapter iv the british conquest of india i. expansion of the empire, 17561818 british occupation of bengal he beginnings of british political sway over india may be traced to the battle of plassey in 1757, when the english east india companys forces defeated sirajuddaulah, the nawab of bengal.
the earlier british struggle with the french in south india had been but a dress rehearsal.
the lessons learnt there were profitably applied in bengal.
bengal was the most fertile and the richest of indias provinces.
its industries and commerce were well developed.
as has been noted earlier, the east india company and its servants had highly profitable trading interests in the province.
the company had secured valuable privileges in 1717 under a royal farman by the mughal emperor, which had granted the company the freedom to export and import their goods in bengal without paying taxes and the right to issue passes or dastaks for the movement of such goods.
the companys servants were also permitted to trade but were not covered by this farman.
they were required to pay the same taxes as indian merchants.
this farman was a perpetual source of conflict between the company and the nawabs of bengal.
for one, it meant loss of revenue to the bengal government.
secondly, the power to issue dastaks for the companys goods was misused by the companys servants to evade taxes on their private trade.
all the nawabs of bengal, from murshid quli khan to alivardi khan, had objected to the english interpretation of the farman of 1717. they had compelled the company to pay lump sums to their treasury, and firmly suppressed the misuse of dastaks.
the.
company had been compelled to accept the authority of the nawabs in the matter, but its servants had taken every opportunity to evade and defy this authority.
matters came to a head in 1756 when the young and qulcktempcted sirajuddaulah succeeded his grandfather, alivardi khan.
he demanded of the english that they should trade on the same basis as in the times of murshid quli khan.
the english refused to comply as they felt  strong after their victory over the french in south india.
they had also come to recognise the political and military weakness of indian states instead of agreeeing to pay taxes on their goods to the nawab, they levied heavy duties on indian goods entering calcutta which was under iheir control.
all this naturally annoyed and angered the t 64 modern india young nawab who also suspected that the company was hostile to him and was favouring his rivals for the throne of bengal the breaking point came when, without taking the nawabs permission, the company began to fortify calcutta in expectation of the coming struggle with the french, who were stationed at this time at chandernagore.
siraj rightly interpreted this action as an attack upon his sovereignty.
how could an independent ruler permit a private company of merchants to build forts or to carry on private wars on his land moreover he feared that if he permitted the english and the french to fight each other on the soil of bengal, he too would meet the fate of the carnatic nawabs.
in other words, siraj, was willing to let the europeans remain, as merchant but not as masters.
he ordered both the english and the french to demolish their fortifications at calcutta and chandernagore and to desist from fighting each other.
white the french company obeyed his order, the english company refused to do so, for its ambition had been whetted and its confidence enhanced by its victories in the carnatic.
tt was now determined to remain in bengal even against the wishes of the nawab and to trade there on its own terms.
it had acknowledged the british governments right to conttolall its activities, it had quietly accepted restrictions on its trade and power imposed in britain by the british government its right to trade with the east had been extinguished by the parliament m 1693 when its charter was withdrawn it had paid huge bribes to the king, the parliament, and the politicians of britain in one year alone, it had to pay  80,000 in bribes.
.nevertheless the english company demanded the absolute right to trade freely in bengal irrespective of the bengal nawabs orders.
this amounted to a direct challenge to the nawabs sovereignty.
no ruler could possibly accept this position.
sirajuddaulah had the statesmanship to see the longterm implications of the english designs.
he decided to make them obey the laws of the land.
acting with great .energy but with undue haste and inadequate preparation, siraj uddaulah sejzed the english factory at kasimbazar, marched on to calcutta, and occupied the fort william on 20 june 1756. he then retired ,from calcutta to celebrate his easy victory, letting the english escape with their ships, this was a mistake for he had underestimated the strength of his enemy.
the english officials took refuge at fulta near the sea protected by their naval superiority.
.
here they waited for aid from madras and, in the meantime, organised a web of intrigue and treachery with the leading men of the nawabs court.
chief among these were mir.jafar, the mir the british conquest op india.
65 bakshi, mawck chand, the officerincharge of calcutta, amichand, a rich merchant, jagat seth, the biggest banker of bengal, and khadim khan, who commanded a large number of the nawabs troops.
from madras came a strong naval and military force under admiral watson and colonel clive.
clive reconquered calcutta m the beginning of 1757 and compelled the nawab to concede all the demands of the english.
the english, however, were not satisfied, they were aiming high.
they had decided to instal a more pliant tool in s i rajviddaii ahs place.
having joined a conspiracy organised by the enemies of the young nawab to place mu jafar on the throne of bengal, they presented the youthful nawab with an impossible set of demands.
both sides realised that a war to the finish would have lo be fought between them.
they met for battle on the field of plassey, 20 miles from murshidabad, on 23 june 1757 the fateful battle of plassey was a battle only in name.
in all, the english lost 29 men while the nawab lost nearly 500. the major part of the nawabs army, led by the traitors mir jafar and rai durlabh, took no part in the fighting.
only a small group of the nawabs soldiers led by mil madan and mohan lai fought bravely and well.
the nawab was forced to flee and was captured and put to death by mir jafars son miran.
the battle nf plassey was followed, in the words of the bengali poet nabm chandra sen, by a night of elei nal gloom for india.
the english proclaimed mir jafar the nuwub of bengal and set on i to gather the reward.
the company was granted undibpuled right 1o free trade in bengal, bihar, and orissa it also received the zamindari of the 24 parganas near calcutta.
mir jafar paid a sum of rs, 17,700,000 ascom soldier in uniformunder the mughal .
government in bengal courtesy notional archives of india, new delhi 66 modern india seapoy in1 uniformin the service of east india companys government in bengal courtesy.
national arckives of india, new delhi pensation for the attack on calcutta to the company and the traders of the city.
in addition, be paid large sums as gifts or bribes to the high officials of the company.
clive, for example, received over two million rupees, watts over one million.
clive later estimated that the company and its servants had collected more than 30million rupees from the puppet nawab.
moreover, it was understood that british merchants and officials would no longer be asked to pay any taxes on their private trade.
the battle of plassey was of immense historical importance, it paved the way for the british mastery of bengal and eventually of the whole of india.
it boosted british prestige and at a single stroke raised them to the status of a major contender for the indian empire.
the rich revenues of bengal enabled them to organise a strong anny.
control over bengal played a decisive role in the anglofrench struggle.
lastly, the victory of plassey enabled the company and its servants to amass nntold wealth at the cost of the helpless people of bengal.
asthe british historians, edward thompson and g.t.
garrett, have remarked to engineer a revolution had been revealed as the most paying game in the world.
a gold lust un equalled since the hysteria that took hold of the spaniards of cortes and pizarros age filled the english mind.
bengal in particular was not to know peace again until it had been bleed white.
even though mir jafar owed his position to the company, he soon repented the bargain he had struck.
his treasury was soon emptied by the demands of the companys officials for presents and bribes, the lead in the matter being given by clive himself.
as colonel malleson has put it, the single aim of the companys officials was to thb british conquest op india 67 grasp all they could to use mir jafar as a gloden sack into which, they could dip their hands at pleasure.
the company itself was seized with unsurpassable greed.
believing that the kamdhemt had been found and that the wealth of bengal was inexhaustible, the directors of the company ordered that bengal should pay the expenses of the bombay and madras presidencies and purchase out of its revenue all the companys exports from india, the company was 110 longer to merely trade with india, it was to use iis control over the nawab of bengal to drain the wealth of the province, mir jafar soon discovered that it was impossible to meet the full demands of the company and its officials who, on their part, began to criticise the nawab for his incapacity in fulfilling their expectations.
and so, in october 1760, they forced him to abdicate in favour of his son inlaw, mir qasim who rewarded his benefactois by granting the company the xammdari of the districts of burdwan, midnapore, and chittagong, and giving handsome presents totalling 29 lakhs of rupees to the high english officials.
mir qasim, however, belied english hopes, and soon emerged as a threat to their position and designs in bengal.
he was an able, efficient, and strong ruler, determined to free himself from foreign control, he believed thit since he had paid the company and its servants adequately for putting him on the throne, they should now leave him alone to govern riengal.
he realised that a full treasury and an efficient army were essential to maintain his independence.
he therefore tried to prevent public disorder, to increase his income by removing corruption from revenue administration, and to raise a modern and disciplined army along european lines.
all this was not to the liking of the english.
most of all they disliked the nawabs attempts to check the misuse of the farman of 1717 by the companys servants, who demanded that their goods whether destined for export or for internal use should be free of duties.
this injured the indian merchants as they had to pay taxes from which the foreigners got complete exemption.
moreover, the companys servants illegally sold the dastaks or free passes to friendly indian merchants who were thereby able to evade the internal customs duties.
these abuses ruined the honest indian traders through unfair competition and deprived the nawab of a very important source of revenue, in addition to this, the company and its servants got intoxicated by their newfound power and the dazzling prospects of wealthand, in their pursuit of riches, began to oppress and illtreat the officials of the nawab and, the poor people pf bengal.
they forced the indian officials and zamindars to give them presents and bribes.
they compelled the indian artisans, peasants, and merchants to sell their goods cheap and to buy dear from them.
people who refused were often flogged or imprisoned.
these years have been described by a recent british historian, pcrcival spear, as the period of open and unashamed plunder.
in fact the prosperity for which bengal was renowned was being gradually destroyed.
mir qasim realised that if these abuses continued he could never hope to make bengal strong or free himself of the companys control.
he therefore took tbe drastic step of abolishing all duties on internal trade, thus giving his own subjects a 68 modern india concession that the english had seized by force.
but the alien merchants were no longer willing lo tolerate equality between themselves and indians.
they demanded the reimposition of duties on indian traders.
the battle was about to be joined again.
the truth of the matter was that there could not exist two masters in bengal.
while mir qasim believed that he was an independent ruler, the english demanded that he should act as a mere tool in their hands, for had they not put him in power mir qasim was defeated in a series of battles in 1763 and fled to avadh where he formed an alliance with shujauddaulah, the nawab of avadh, and shah alam ii, the fugitive mughal emperor.
the three allies clashed with the companys army at buxar on 22 october 1764 and were thoroughly defeated.
this was one of the most decisive battles of indian history for it demonstrated the superiority of english arms over the combined army of two of the major indian powers.
it firmly established the british as masters of bengal, biliar and orissa and placed avadh at their mercy.
clive, who had returned to bengal in 1765 as its governor, decided to seize the chance of power in bengal and to gradually transfer the authority of government from the nawab to the company.
in 1763, the british had restored mir jafar as nawab and collected huge sums for the company and its high officials.
on mir jafars death, they placed his second sort nizamuddaulah on the throne and as a reward made him sign a new treaty on 20 february 1765. by this treaty the nawab was to disband most of his army and to administer bengal through a deputy subaii dar who was to be nominated by the company and who could not be dismissed without its approval.
the company thus gained supreme control over the administration or nizamat of bengal.
the members of the bengal council of the company once again extracted nearly 15 lakhs of rupees from ihe new nawab froni shah alam ii, who was stillthe titular head of the mughal empire, the company secured the diwani, or the right to collect revenue, of bengal, bihar, and orissa.
thus, its control over bengal was legalised and the revenues of this most prosperous of indian provinces placed at its command.
in return the comiv.n.
gave him a subsidy of 2 6 million rupees and secured inr him lie dviics of kora and allahabad.
the emperor resided in ihc foil of ulahabad foi x years as a virtual prisonei of the english.
the nawab of avadh, shujauddaulah, was made to pay a war indemnity of five million rupees to the company.
moreover, the two signed an alliance by which the company promised to support the nawab against an outside attack provided he paid for the services of the troops sent to his aid.
this alliance made the nawab a dependent of the company.
the nawab welcomed the alliance in the false belief that the company, being primarily a trading body, was a transitory power while the marathas and the afghans were his real enemies.
this was to prove a costly mistake for both avadh and the rest of the country.
on the other hand the british had very shrewdly decided to consolidate their acquisition of bengal and, in the meanwhile, to use avadh as a buffer or a barrier state between their possessions and the marathas, dual system of administration of bengal the east india company became the real master of bengal at least from 1765. the british conquest op india.
69 its army was in sole control of its defence and the supreme political power was in its hands.
the nawab depended for his internal and external security on the british.
as the diwdn, the company directly collected its revenues, while through the right to nominate  the deputy subahdar, it controlled the nizamat or the police and judicial powers.
the virtual unity of the two branches of government under british control was signified by the fact that the same person acted in bengal as the deputy diwan on behalf of the company and as deputy subahdar on behalf of the nawab.
this arrangement is known in history as the dual or double government.
it held a great advantage for the british they had power without responsibility.
they controlled the finances of the province and its army directly and its administration indirectly.
the nawab and his officials had the responsiblity of administration but not the power to discharge it.
the weaknesses of the government could be blamed on the indians while its fruits were gathered by the british.
the consequences for the people of bengal were disastrous neither the company nor the nawab cared for their welfare.
in any case, the nawabs officials had no power to protect the people from the greed and rapacity of the company and its servants.
on the other hand, they were themselves in a hurry to sxploit their official powers.
this companys servants had now the whole of bengal to themselves and their oppression of the people increased greatly.
we can quote clive himself i shall only say that such a scene of anarchy, confusion, bribery,1 corruption, and extortion vas neverseen or heard of in any country but bengal, nor such and so .
many foffuneaacquired jn so unjust and rapacious a mannei.
the three provinces of bengal, bihar, and orissa, producing a clear revenue of  3 millions sterling, have been under the absolute management of the companys servants, ever since mir jafari restoration to the subahship, and they have, both civil and military, exacted and levied contribution1 from every wan of power and consequence, from the nawab down to the lowest zamindar.
the companys authorities on thei r part set out to gather the rich harvest and drain bengal of its wealth.
they stopped sending money from england to purchase indian goods.
instead, they purchased these goods from the revenues of bengal and sold them abroad.
these were knowu as the companys investment and formed a part of its profits.
on top of all this the british government wanted its share of the rich prize and, in 1767, ordered the company to pay it  400,000 per year.
in the years 1766, 1767, and 1768 alone, nearly  5.7 million were drained from bengal.
the abuses of the dual government and the drain of wealth led to the impoverishment and exhaustion of that unlucky province.
in 1770, bengal suffered from a famine which in its effects proved one of the most terrible famines known in human history.
people died in lakhs and nearly onethird of bengals population fell victim to its ravages.
though the famine was due to failure of rains, its effects were heightened by the companys policies.
wars under warren hastings 17721785 and cornwallis 17861793 the east india company had by 1772 become an important indian power and its directors in england and its officials in india set out to consolidate their control over bengal before beginning a new round of conquests.
however, 70 modern india their habit of interfering in the internal affairs of the indian states and their lust for territory and money soon involved them in a series of wars.
in 1766 they entered into an alliance with the nizam of hyderabad to help him in attacking haidar ali of mysore in return for the cession of the northern sarkars.
but haidar ali was more than a match for the companys armies.
having beaten back the british attack, he threatened madras in 1769 and forced the madras council to sign peace on liis terms.
both sides restored each others conquests and promised mutual help in case of attack by a third parly.
but when haidar ali was attacked by the marathas in 1771, the english went back on their promise and did not come to his help.
this led haidar ah to distrust and dislike them.
then, in 1775, theenglish plashed with the marathas.
an intense struggle for power was taking place at that time among the marathas between the supporters of the infant peshwa madhav rao ii, led by nana phadnis, and raghunath rao.
the british officials in bombay decided to take advantage of this struggle by intervening on behalf of raghunath rao.
they hoped thus torepeat the exploits of tfyeir countrymen in madras and bengal and reap the consequent monetary advantages.
this involved them ini a long war with the marathas which lasted from 1775 to 1782, tub british conquest of india 71 in the beginning, tbe marathas defeated the british forces at talegaon and forced them to sign the convention of wadgaon by which the english renounced all their conquests and gave up the cause of raghunath rao.
but the war was toon resumed this was a dark hour indeed for the british power in india, all the maratha chiefs were united behind the, peshwa and his chief minister, nana phadnis.
the southern indian powers had long been resenting the presence of the british among them, and haidar ah and the nizam chose this moment to declare war against the company.
nana phadnia from a portrait in jagmohan temple, mysore courtfjy archaeological survey of india, new delhi 72 modern india thus the british were faced with the powerful combination of the marathas, mysore and hyderabad.
moreover, abroad they were waging a losing war in their colonies in america where the people had rebelled in 1776. they had also to counter the determined design of the french to exploit the difficulties of their old rival.
the british in india were, however, led at this time by their brilliant, energetic, and experienced govern orgeneral, warren hastings.
acting with firm resolve and determination, he retrieved the vanishing british power and prestige.
a british force under goddard marched across central india in a brilliant military manoeuvre and after a series of victorious engagements reached ahmedabad which he captured in 1780. the english had found in the marathas a determined enemy, with immense resources.
mahadji sindhia had given evidence of his power which the english dreaded to contest.
neither side won victory and the war had come to a standstill.
with the intercession of mahadji, peace was concluded in 1782 by the treaty of salbai by which the status quo was maintained it saved the british from the combined opposition of indian poweis.
this war, known in history as the first anglomaratha war, did not end in victory for either side.
but it did give the british 20 years of peace with the marathas, the strongest indian power of the day.
the british utilized this period to consolidate their rule over the bengal presidency, while the maratha chiefs frittered away their energy in bitter mutual squabbles.
moreover, the treaty of salbai enabled the british to exert pressure on mysore as the marathas promised to help them in recovering their territories from haidar all.
once again, the british had succeeded m dividing the indian powers.
war with haidar ali had started in 1780 repeating his earlier exploits, haidar ali inflicted one defeat after another on the british armies in the cariiatic and forced them to surrender in larger numbers.
he soon occupied almost the whole of the carnatic.
but once again british arms and diplomacy saved the day.
warren hastings bribed the nizam with the cession of gnntur district and gained his withdiawal from the antibritish alliance.
during 178182 he made peace with the.marathas and thus freed a large part of his army for use against mysore.
in july 1781 the british army under eyre coote defeated haidar ali at porto novo and saved madras.
after haidar alls death in december 1782, the war was carried on by his son, tipu sultan.
since neither side was capable of overpowering the other, peace was signed by them in march 1784 and both sides restored all conquests.
thus, though the british had been shown to be too weak to defeat either the marathas or mysore, they had certainly proved their ability to hold their own in india.
not only had they been saved from extinction m the south, they had emerged from their recent wars as one of the three great powers in india.
the third british encounter with mysore was more fruitful from the british point of view.
the peace of 1784 bad not removed the grounds for struggle between  tipu and the british it had merely postponed the struggle.
the authorities of the east india company were acutely hostile to tipu.
they looked upon him as their most formidable rival in the south and as the chief obstacle the british conquest of indta 73 standing between them and complete domination over south india.
tipu, on his part, thoroughly disliked the english, saw them as the chief danger to his own independence and nursed the ambition to expel them from india.
war between the two again began in 1789 and ended in tipus defeat in 1792. even though tipu fought with exemplary bravery, lord cornwallis, the then governorgeneral, had succeeded through shrewd diplomacy in isolating him by winning oyer the marathas, the nizam, and the rulers of travancore and coorg.
this war again revealed that the indian powers were shortsighted enough to aid the foreigner against another indian power for the sake of temporary advantages.
by the treaty of seringa patam, tipu ceded half of his territories to the qllies and paid 330 lakhs of rupees as indemnity.
the third anglomysore war destroyed tipus dominant position in the south and firmly established british supremacy there.
expansion under lord wellesley 17981805 the next largescale expansion of british rule in india occurred during the governortgenerajship of lord wellesley who came to india in 1798 at a time when the british were locked in a life and death struggle with france all over the world.
till then, the british had followed the policy of consolidating their gains and resources in india and making territorial gains only when this could be done safely without antagonising the major indian powers.
lord wellesley decided that the time was ripe for bringing as many indian states 4s possible under british control, by 1797 the two strongest indian powers, mysore and the marathas, had declined in power, the third anglomysore war had reduoed mysore to a mere shadowof its recent greatness and the marathas were dissipating their strength in mutual intrigues and wars.
in other words, political conditions in india were propitious for a policy of expansion aggression was easy as well as profitable.
moreover, the trading and industrial classes of britain desired 74 modbrn india further expansion in india hitherto they had favoured a policy of peace in the belief that war was injurious to trade.
but by the end of the 18th century they had come to think that british goods would sell in india on a large scale only when the entire country had come under british control.
the company too was in favour of such a policy provided it could be pursued successfully and without adversely affecting its profits, lastly, the british in india were determined to keep french influence from penetrating india and, therefore, to curb and crush any indian state which might try to have dealings with france.
the security of the companys dominion in india was threatened by the impending invasion of zaman shah, the ruler of kabul, who could expect support from the indian chiefs in northern india and who was invited by tipu to join in a concerted effort to oust the british from this country.
to achieve his political aims wellesley relied on three methods the system of subsidiary alliances, outright wars, and assumption of the territories of previously subordinated rulers.
while the practice of helping an indian ruler with a paid british force was quite old, it was given a definite shape by wellesley who used it to subordinate the indian states to the paramount authority of the company.
under his subsidiary alliance system, the ruler of the allying indian state was compelled to accept the permanent stationing of a british force within his territory and to pay a subsidy for its maintenance.
all this was done allegedly for his protection but was, in fact, a form through which the indian ruler paid tribute to the company, sometimes the ruler ceded part of his territory instead of paying annual subsidy.
the subsidiary treaty also usually provided that the indian ruler would agree to the posting at his court of a british resident, that he would not employ any european in his service without the approval of the british, and that he would sot negotiate with any other indian ruler without consulting the governorgeneral.
in return the british undertook to defend the ruler from his enemies.
they also promised noninterference in the internal affairs of the allied state, but this was a promise they seldom kept.
in reality, by signing a subsidiary alliance, an indian state virtually signed away its independence.
it lost the right of selfdefence, of maintaining diplomatic relations, of employing foreign experts, and of settling its disputes with its neighbours.
in fact, the indian ruler lost all vestiges of sovereignty in external matters and became increasingly subservient to the british resident who interfered in the day to day administration of the state.
in addition, the system tended to bring about the internal decay of the protected state.
the cost of the subsidiary force provided by the british was very high and, in fact, much beyond the paying capacity of the state.
the payment of the arbitrarily fixed and artificially bloated subsidy invariably disrupted the economy of the state and impoverished its people.
the system of subsidiary alliances also led to the disbandment of the armies of the protected states.
lakhs of soldiers and officers were deprived of their hereditary livelihood, spreading misery and degradation in the country.
many of them joined the roaming bands of pindarees which the british conquest op india.
75 were to ravage the whole of tndia during the first two decades of the 19th century.
moreover, the rulers of tlie protected states tended to neglect the interests of their people and to oppress them as they no longer feared them.
they had no incentive to be good rulers as they were fully pro tected by the british from domestic and foreign enemies.
the subsidiary alliance system was, on the other hand, extremely advantageous to the british.
they c6uld now maintain a large army at the cost of the indian states.
they were enabled to fight wars far away from their own territories, since any war would occur in the territories either of the british ally or of the british enemy.
they controlled the defence and foreign relations of the protected ally, and had a powerm force stationed at the very heart of his lands, and could, therefore, at a time of their choosing, overthrow him and annex his territories by declaring him to be inefficient.
as far as the british were concerned, the system of subsidiary alliances was in the words of a british writer, a system of fattening allies as we fatten oxen, till they were worthy of being devoured.
lord wellesley signed his first subsidiary treaty with the nizam of hyderabad in 1798. the nizam was to dismiss his frenchtrained troops and to maintain a subsidiary force of six battalions at a cost of  24ij7i0 per year in return, the british guaranteed his state against maratha encroachments.
by another treaty in 1800,the subsidiary force was increased and, in lieu of cash payment, the nizam ceded part of his territories to the company, the nawab of avadh was forced to sign a subsidiary treaty in 1801. in return for a larger subsidiary force, the nawab was made to surrender to the british nearly half of his kingdom consisting of rohilkhand and the territory lying phtdaree fort in the neighbourhood of varanasi courtesy national archives of india, nedelhi 76 modern india between the ganga and the jamuna.
moreover, the nawab was no longer lo be independent, even within the part of avadh left with him.
he must accept any advice or order from the british authorities regarding the internal administration of his state.
his police was to be reorganised under the control and direction of british officers.
his own army was virtually disbanded and the british had the right to station their troops in any part of his state.
wellesley dealt with mysore, carnatic, tanjore, and surat even more sternly.
tipu of mysore would, of course, never agree to a subsidiary treaty.
on the contrary, he had never reconciled himself to the loss of half of his territory in 1792. he worked incessantly to strengthen his forces for the inevitable struggle with the british he entered into negotiations for an alliance with revolutionary france.
he sent missions to afghanistan, arabia and turkey to forge an anti british alliance.
lord wellesley was no less determined to bring tipu to heel and to prevent any possibility of the french reentering india.
the british army attacked and defeated tipu in a brief but fierce war m 1799, before french help could reach him.
tipu still refused to beg for peace on humiliating terms.
he proudly declared that it was better to die like a soldier, than to live a miserable dependent on the infidels, in the list of their pensioned, rajas and nabobs.
he met a heros end on 4 may 1799 while defending his capital seringapatam.
his army remained loyal to him to the very end.
the taking over of the capital was described by arthur wellesley, the future duke of wellington, in the following words nothing therefore can have exceeded what was done on the night of the 4th.
scarcely a house in the town was left unplundered, and i understand that in camp jewels of the greatest value, bars of gold, etc., etc., have been offered for sale in the bazars of the army fey our soldiers, sepoys, and followers... they the people are returning to their houses and beginning again to follow their occupations.
, but the properly of every one is gone.
nearly half of tipus dominions were divided between the british and their ally, the nizam the, reduced kingdom of mysore was restored to the decendants pf the original rajas from whom haidar ali had seized the british conquest op india.
77 power.
a special treaty of subsidiary alliance was imposed on.
the new raja by which the governorgeneral was authorised to take over the administration of the state in case of necessity.
mysore was, in fact, made a complete dependency of the company.
an important result of the fourth anglomysore war was the complete elimination of the french threat to british supremacy in india.
in 1801, lord wellesley forced a new treaty upon the puppet nawab of carnatic compelling him to cede his,kingdom to the company in return for a handsome pension.
.
the madras presidency as it existed til1,1947 was now oreated, by attaching the carnatic to territories seized from mysore, including the malabar.
similarly, the territories of the rulers of tanjore and sutat were taken over and their rulers pensioned off.
the marathas were the only major indian power left .outside the sphere of british control.
wellesley now turned his attention towards them and began aggressive interference in their internal affairs.
the maratbft empire at this time consisted of a confederacy af five big ichiefs, nftmely, the peshwa at poona, the gaekwad at barodat the sindhia at gwalior, the holkar at indore, and the bhonsle at nagpur, the peshwa being the.
nominal head of the confederacy.
unfortunately for the marathas, they lost nearly all of their wise and experienced leaders towards the close of the 18th century.
mahadji sindhia, tukoji holkar, ahilya bai holkar, peshwa madhav rao i, and nana phadnis, the man who had kept tbe maratha confederacy together for the last 30 years, all were dead by the year 1800. what was worse, the maratha chiefs were engaged in bitter fratricidal strife, blind to the real daoger from the rapidly advancing foreigner.
yeshwant rao holkar on one side and dan la t rao sindhia and peshwa baji rao ii on the other wer locked in mortal combat, wellesley had repeatedly offered a subsidiary alliance to the peshwa and the storming of sermgapatam courtesy.
archaeological survey of india, new delhi 78 modern india sindhia.
but the farsighted nana phadnis had refused to fall into the trap.
however, when on 25 october 1802, the day of the great festival of diwali, holkar defeated the combined armies of the peshwa and sindhia, the cowardly peshwa baji rao ii rushed into the arms of the english and on the fateful last day of 1802 signed the subsidiary treaty at bassein.
the british had finally realised their ambition.
lord wellesley wrote on 24 december 1802 this crisis of affairs appeared to me to afford the most favourable opportunity for the complete establishment of the interests of the british pow er in the maratha empire, without the hazard ofinvolvmg us in a contest with any party.
the victory had been a little too easy and wellesley was wrong in one respect the proud maratha chiefs would not surrender their great tradition of independence without a struggle.
but even in this moment of their peril they would not unite against their common enemy.
when sindhia and bhonsle fought the british, holkar stood on the sidelines and gaekwad gave help to the british.
when holkar took up arms, bhonsle and sindhia nursed their wounds.
moreover, the maratha chiefs underestimated the enormously increased strength of the enemy and went into battle without adequate preparation.
in the south, the british armies led by arthur wellesley defeated the combined armies of sindhia and bhonsle at assaye in september 1803 and at argaon in november.
in the north, lord lake routed sindhias army at laswari on the first of november and occupied aligarh, delhi and agra.
once again the blind emperor of india became a pensioner of the company.
the maratha allies had to sue for peace, both became subsidiary allies of the company.
they ceded part of their territories to the british, admitted british residents to their courts and promised not to employ any europeans without british approval.
the british gained complete control over the orissa coast and the territories between the ganga and the jamuna.
the peshwa became a disgruntled puppet in their hands, wellesley now turned his attention towards holkar, but yeshwant rao holkar proved more than a match for the british.
using traditional maratha tactics of mobile warfare and in alliance with the jats, he fought british armies to a standstill, holkars ally, the raja of bharatpur, inflicted heavy losses on lake who unsuccessfully attempted to storm his fort.
moreover, overcoming his ageold antagonism to the holkar family, sindhia began to think of joining hands with holkar.
on the other hand, the shareholders of the east india company discovered that the policy of expansion through war was proving costly and was reducing their profits.
the companys debt had increased .from  17 million in 1797 to  31 million in 1806. moreover, britains finances were getting exhausted at a time when napoleon was once again becoming a major threat in europe.
british statesmen and the directors of the company felt that time had come to check further expansion, to put an end to ruinous expenditure, and to digest and consolidate britains recent gains in india.
wellesley was therefore recalled from india and the company made peace with holkar in january 1806 by the treaty of rajghat giving back to the latter the greater part of his territories.
wellesleys expansionist policy had been checked near the end.
ml the same the british conquest op india.
79 it had resulted in the east india company becoming the pa a mount power in india.
a young officer in the companys judicial servicj, henry roberclaw, could write about 1805 an englishman in india is proud and tenacious, he feels himself  eojlqucror amongst a vanquished people and looks down with some degree of superiority on all below him.
expansion under lord hastings the second angiomaratha war had shattered the power of the maratha chiefs but not their spirit.
the loss of their freedom rankled in llieir hearts.
they made a desperate last attempt to regain their independence and old prestige in 1817. the lead in organising a united front of the maratha chiefs was taken by the peshwa who was smarting under the rigid control exercised by the british resident.
however, once again the marathas failed to evolve a concerted and wellthought out plan of action.
the peshwa attacked the british residency at poona in november 1817. appa sahib of nagpur attacked the residency at nagpur, and madhav rao holkar made preparations for war.
the governorgeneral, lord hastings, struck back with characteristic vigour.
he compelled sindhia to accept british suzerainty, and defeated the armies of the peshwa, bhonsle and holkar.
the peshwa was dethroned and pensioned off at bithur near kanpur.
his territories were annexed and the enlarged presidency of bombay brought into existence.
holkar and bhonsle accepted subsidiary forces.
all the maratha chiefs had to cede to the company large tracts of their territories.
to satisfy maratha pride, the small kingdom of satara was founded out of the peshwas lands and giver, to the descendant of chatrapati shivaji who ruled it as a complete dependent of the british.
like other rulers of indian 80 modern india based upon survey of india map with the permission of he surveyor general of india, the territorial waters of india extend into the sea to fi distance oftwelvo nautical miles measured from the appropriate bnsc line.
government of india copyright 1982 the british conquest of india 81 states, the maratha chiefs too existed from now on at the mercy of the british power.
the rajputana states had been dominated for several decades by sindhia and holkar.
after the downfall of the marathas, they lacked the energy to reassert their independence and readily accepted british supremacy.
thus, by 1818, the entire indian subcontinent excepting the punjab and sindh had been brought under british control.
part of it was ruled directly by the british and the rest by a host of indian rulers over whem the british exercised paramount power.
these states had virtually no armed forces of their own, nor did they have any independent foreign relations.
they paid heavily for the british forces stationed in their territories to control them.
they were autonomous in their internal affairs, but even in this respect they acknowledged british authority wielded through a resident.
they were on perpetual probation.
on the other hand, the british were now free to reach out to the natural frontiers of india.
ii the consolidation op british power, 181557 the british completed the task of conquering the whole of india from 1818 to 1857. sindb and the punjab were conquered and avadh, the central provinces and a large number of other petty states were annexed.
the conquest of sindh the conquest of sindh occurred as a result of the growing anglc russian rivalry in europe and asia and the consequent british fears that russia might attack india through afghanistan or persia.
to counter russia, the british government decided to increase its influence in afghanistan and peisia.
it further felt that this policy could be successfully pursued only if sindh was brought under british control.
the commercial possibilities of the river sindh were an additional attraction.
the roads and rivers of sindh were opened to british trade by a treaty in 1832. the chiefs of sindh, known as amirs, were made to sign a subsidiary treaty in 1839. and finally, in spite of previous assurances that its territorial integrity would be respected, sindh was annexed in 1843 after a brief campaign by sir charles napier who had earlier written in his diary we have no right to seize sind, yet we shall do so, and a very advantageous, useful humane piece of rescahty it will be.
he received seven lakhs of rupees as prize money for accomplishing the task.
tbe conquest of the punjab the death of maharaja ranjit singh in june 1.839 was followed by political instability and rapid changes of government in the punjab.
selfish and corrupt leaders came to the front.
ultimately, power fell into the hands of the brave and patriotic but utterly indisciplined army.
this led the british to look greedily across the sutlej upon the land of the five rivets even though they had signed a treaty of perpetual friendship with ranjit singh in 1809. the british officials increasingly talked of having to wage a campaign in the punjab.
the punjab army let itself be provoked by the warlike actions of the british 82 modern india and their intrigues with the corrupt chiefs of the punjab.
in november 1844, major broadfoot, who was known to be hostile to the sikhs, was appointed the british agent in ludhiana.
broadfoot repeatedly indulged in hostile actions and gave provocations.
the corrupt chiefs and officials found that the army would sooner or later deprive them of their power, position, and possessions.
they conceived the idea of saving themselves by embroiling the army in a war with the british.
in the autumn of 1845, news reached that boats designed to form bridges had been despatched from bombay to ferozepur on the sutlej.
barracks for additional troops were built in the forward area and additional regiments began to be despatched to the frontier with the punjab.
the punjab army, now convinced that the british were determined to occupy the punjab, took counter measures.
when it heard in december that lord gough, the commanderinchief, and lord haidinge, the governor general, were marching towards ferozepur, it decided to strike.
war between the two was thus declared on 13 december 1845. the danger from the foieigner immediately united the hindus, the muslims, and the sikhs.
the punjab army fought heroically and with exemplary courage.
but some of its leaders had already turned traitors.
the prime minister, raja lai singh, and the commanderinchief, misar tej singh, were secretly corresponding with the enemy.
the punjab army was forced to concede defeat and to sign the humiliating treaty of lahore on 8 march 1846. the british annexed the jullundhar doab and handed over jammu and kashmir to raja gulab singh dogra for a cash payment of five million rupees.
the punjab army was reduced to 20,000 infantry and 12,0 cavalry and a strong british force was stationed at lahore.
later, on 16 december 1846, another treaty was signed giving the british resident at lahore full authority over all matters in every department of the state.
moreover, the british were permitted to station their troops in any part of the state, from now on the british resident became the real ruler of the punjab which lost its independence and became a vassal state.
but the aggressively imperialist sections of the british officialdom in india were still unsatisfied, for they wanted to impose direct british rule over the punjab.
their opportunity came in 1848 when the freedom loving punjabis rose up in numerous local revolts.
two of the prominent le volts were led by mulraj at multan and chatter singh attanwala near lahore.
the punjabis were once again decisively defeated.
lord dalhousie seized this opportunity to annex the punjab.
thus, the last independent state of india was absorbed in the british empire of india.
dalhousie and the policy of annexation 18481856 lord dalhousie came out to india as the governorgeneral in 1848, he was from the beginning determined to extend direct british rule over aslarge an area as possible.
he had declared that the extinction of all i native states of india is just a question of time.
the ostensible reason for this policy was his belief that british administration was far superior to the corrupt and oppressive the british conquest op india.
83 administration of the native rulers.
however, the underlying motive of this policy was the expansion of british exports to india.
dalhousie, in common with other aggressive imperialists, believed that british exports to the native states of india were suffering because of the maladministration of these states by their indian rulers, moreover, they thought that their indian allies had already served the purpose of facilitating british conquest of india and could now be got rid of profitably.
the chief instrument through which lord dalhousie implemented his policy of annexation was the doctrine of lapse.
under this doctrine, when the ruler of a protected state died without a natural heir, his state was not to pass to an adopted heir as sanctioned by the ageold tradition of the country.
instead, it was to be annexed to the british dominions unless the adoption had been clearly approved earlier by the british authorities.
many states, including sataia in 1848 and nagpur and jhansi in 1854, were annexed by applying this doctrine.
dalhousie also refused to recognise the titles of many exrulers or to pay their pensions.
thus, the titles of the nawabs of carnatic and of surat and the raja of tanjore were extinguished.
similarly, after the death of the expeshwa baji rao ii, who had been made the raja of bithnr, dalhousie refused to extend his pay or pension to his adopted son, nana saheb.
lord dalhousie was keen on annexing the kingdom of avadh.
but the task presented certain difficulties.
for one, the nawabs of avadh had been british allies since the battle of buxar, moreover, they had been most obedient to the british over the years.
the nawab of avadh had many heirs and could not therefore be covered by the doctrine of lapse.
some other pretext had to be found for depriving him of his dominions.
finally, lord dalhousie hit upon the idea of alleviating the plight of the people of avadh.
nawab wajid ali shah was accused of having misgoverned his state and of refusing to introduce reforms.
his state was therefore annexed in 1856. undoubtedly, the degeneration of the administration of avadh was a painful reality for its people.
the nawabs of avadh, like other princes of the day, were selfish rulers absorbed ia selfindulgence who cared little for good administration or for the welfare of the people.
but the responsibility for this state of affairs was in part that of the british who had at least since 1801 controlled and indirectly governed avadh.
in reality, it was the immense potential of avadh as a market for manchester goods which excited dalhousies greed and aroused his philanthropic feelings.
and for similar reasons, to satisfy britains growing demand for raw cotton, dalhousie took away the cottonproducing province of berav from the nizam in 1853. it needs to be clearly understood that the question of the maintenance or annexation of the natives states was of no great lelevance at this time.
in fact, there were no indian states in existence at that time, the protected native states were as much a part of the british empiie as the territories ruled directly by the company.
if the form of british control over some of these states was changed, it was to suit british convenience.
the interests of their people had httle to do with 84 modern india the change.
exercises 1. what were the causes of the war between the east india company and nawab sirajuddaulah 2. how was the battle of plassey fought what were its consequences 3. discuss the clash between mir qasim and the east india company.
4. trace the course of british wars with mysore.
5. discuss the underlying factors and forces of wellesleys policy of expansion.
what were the basic methods he used to achieve his aims 6. how did the british overpower the maratha confederacy9 7. examine the policy of conquest and annexations followed by dalhousie.
8. write short notes on a mir jafar, b clive, c the dual government of bengal, d annexation of sindh, e annexation of avadh.
the british conquest op india.
85  government of india copyright 1982 based upon survey of india map with the permission of the surveyor general dr india.
the territorial waters oflndia extend into the sea to a. distance oftwelvt nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line.
c h a p t e r v the structure of the government and the economic policies of the british empire in india, 17571857 aving acquired the vast empire of india, the east india company had to devise suitable methods of government to control and administer it.
the administrative policy of the company underwent frequeni changes during the long period between 1757 and 1857. however, it never lost sight of its main objects which were to increase the companys profits, to enhance the profitability of its indian possessions to britain, and to maintain and strengthen the british hold over india all other purposes were subordinated to these aims.
the administrative machinery of the government of india was designed and developed to serve these ends.
the main emphasis in this respect was placed on the maintenance oflaw and order so that trade with india and exploitation of its resources could be carried out without disturbance.
the structure of government when the officials of the east india company acquired control over bengal in 1765, they had little intention of making any innovations in its administration.
they only desired to carry on their profitable trade and to collect taxes for remission to england, from 1765 to 1772, in the period of the dual government, indian officials were allowed to function as before but under the overall control of the british governor and british officials.
the indian officials had responsibility but no power while the companys officials had power but no responsibility.
both sets of officials were venal and corrupt men.
in 1772 the company ended the dual government and undertook to administer bengal directly through its own servants.
but the evils inherent in the administration of a country by a purely commercial company soon came to the surface.
the east india company was at this time a commercial body designed to trade with the east.
moreover, its higher authority was situated in england, many thousands of miles away from india.
yet, it had come to wield political power over millions of people.
this anomalous state of affairs posed many problems for the british government.
what was to be the relation of the east india company and its possessions to the government in britain how were the companys h the structure of the government 97 authorities in britain to control the great multitude of officials and soldiers stationed in far away india how was a single centre of control to be provided in india over the farflung british possessions in bengal, madras and bombay.
the first of these problems was the most pressing as welt as the most important.
it was, moreover, closely interwoven with party and parliamentary rivalries in britain, the political ambitions of english statesmen, and the commercial greed of english merchants.
the rich resources of bengal had fallen into the hands of the company whose proprietors immediately raised dividends to 10 per cent in 1767 and proposed in 1771 to raise the rate further to 12 per cent.
the companys english servants took advantage of their position to make quick fortunes through illegal and unequal trade and forcible collection of bribes and gifts from indian chiefs and zamindars.
clive returned to england at the age of 34 with wealth and property yielding  40,000 a year.
the companys high dividends and the fabulous wealth brought home by its officials excited the jealousy of the other sections of british society.
merchants kept out of the east by the monopoly of the company, the growing class of manufacturers and, in general, the rising forces of free enterprise in britain wanted to share in the profitable indian trade and the riches of india which the company and its servants alone were enjoying.
they, therefore, worked hard to destroy the companys trade monopoly and, in order to achieve this, they attacked the company administration of bengal.
they also made the officials of the company who returned from india their special target.
these officials were given the derisive title of nabobs sod were ridiculed in the press and on the stage.
they were boycotted by the aristocracy and were condemned as the exploiters and oppressors of the indian people.
their two main targets were clive and warren hastings.
by condemning the nabobs, the opponents of the compafiy hoped to make the company unpopular and then to displace it.
many ministers and other members of parliament were keen to benefit from the acquisition of bengal.
they sought to win popular support by forcing the company to pay tribute to the british government so that indian revenu.s could be used to reduce taxation or the public debt of england.
in 767 the parliament passed an act obliging the company to pay to the british treasury  400,000 per year.
many political thinken and statesmen of britain wanted to control the activities of the company and its officials because they were afraid that the powerful company and its rich officials wouij completely debauch the english nation and 90 modern india its politics.
the parliamentary politics of britain during the latter half of the 18th century were corrupt in the extreme.
the company as well as its retired officials bought seats in the house of commons for their agents.
many english statesmen were worried that the company and itb officials, backed by indian plunder, might gam a preponderant influence in the government of britain.
the company and its vast empire in india had to be controlled or the company as master of india would soon come to control british administration and be in a position to destroy the liberties of the british people.
the exclusive privileges of the company were also attacked by the rising school of economists representing freetrade manufacturing capitalism.
in his celebrated work, the wealth of nations, adam smith, the founder of classical economics, condemned the exclusive companies such exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in many respect always more or less inconvenient to the countries in which they are established and destinedve to those which have the misfortune to fall under their government.
thus, reorganisation of the relations between the british state and the companys authorities became necessary and the occasion arose when the company had to ask the government for a loan of  1,000,000. but, while the companys enemies were many and powerful, it was not without powerful friends in parliament moreover, the king, george iii, was its patron.
the company, therefore, fought back.
in the end, parliament worked out a compromise by which the interests of the company and of the various influential sections of british society were delicately balanced.
it was decided that the british government would control the basic policies of the companys indian administration so that british rule in india waa carried on in the interests of the british upper classes as a whole.
at the same time the company would retain its monopoly of eastern trade and the valuable right of appointing its officials in india.
the details of indian administration were also left to the directors of the company.
the first important parliamentary act regarding the companys affairs was the regulating act of 1773. this act made changes in the constitution of the court of directors of the company and subjected their actions to the supervision of the british government.
the directors were to lay before the ministry all correspondence dealing with the civil and military affairs and the revenues of india.
in india, the government of bengal was to be carried on by a governorgeneral and his council who were given the power to superintend and control the bombay and madras presidencies in matters of war and peace.
the act also provided for the establish, mcnt of a supreme court of justice at calcutta to administer justioe to europeans, their employees, and the citizens of calcutta.
the regulating act soon broke down in practice.
it had not given the british government effective and decisive control over the company.
in india it had placed the governorgeneral at the mercy of his council.
three of the councillors could combine and outvote the governorgeneral on any matter.
in practice, the structure of the government 91 warren hastings, the first governorgeneral under the act, and three of his councillors quarrelled incessantly, often creating deadlocks in the administration.
the governorgenerals control over the other two presidencies also proved inadequate in practice.
most important of all, the act had failed to resolve the conflict between the company and its opponents in england who were daily growing stronger and more vocal.
moreover, the company remained extremely vulnerable to the attacks of its enemies as the administration of its indian possessions continued to be corrupt, oppressive, and economically disastrous.
the defects of the regelating act and the exigencies of british politics necessitated the passing in 1784 of another important act known as pitts india act.
this act gave the british government supreme control over the companys affairs and its administration in india.
it established six commissioners for the affairs of india, popularly known as the board of control, including two cabinet ministers.
the board of control was to guide and control the work of the court of directors and the government of india.
in important and urgent matters it had the power to send direct orders to india through a secret committee of directors.
the act placed the government of india in the hands of the governor general and a council of three, so that if the goverhorgeneral could get the support of even one member, he could have his way.
the act clearly subordinated the bombay and madras presidencies to bengal in all questions of war, diplomacy, and revenues.
with this act began a new phase of the british conquest of india.
while the east india company became the instrument of british national policy, india was to be made to serve the interests of all sections of the ruling classes of britain.
the company having saved its monopoly of the indian and chinese trade was satisfied.
its directors retained the profitable right of appointing and dismissing its british officials in india.
moreover, the government of india was to be carried out through their agency.
while pitts india act laid down the general framework in which the government of india was to be carried on till 1857, later enactments brought about several important changes which gradually diminished the powers and privileges of the company.
in 1786, the governorgeneral was given the authority to overrule his council n matters of importance affecting safety, peace, or the interests of the empire in india.
by the charter act of 1813, the trade monopoly of the company in india was ended and trade with india was thrown open to all british subjects, but trade in tea and trade with china were still exclusive to the company.
the government and the revenues of india continued to be in the hands of the company.
the company also continued to appoint its officials in india.
the charter act of 1833 brought the companys monopoly of tea trade and trade with china to an end.
at the same time the debts of the company were taken over by the government of india which was also to pay its shareholders a 10 per cent dividend on their capital.
the government of india continued to be run by the company under the strict control of the board of control.
thus, the various acts of parliament discussed above completely subordinated the company and its indian administration to the british government.
at the same 92 modern india time, it was recognised that day to day administration of india could not be run or even superintended from a distance of 6,000 miles.
supreme authority in india was, therefore, delegated to the governorgeneral in council.
the governor general, having the authonty to overrule his council in important questions, became in fact the real, effective ruler of india, functioning under the superintendence, control and direction of the british government.
it is to be noted that indians were allowed no share in their own administration.
the three seats of authority, as far as india was concerned, were the court of directors of the company, the board of control representing the british government, and the governorgeneral.
with none of the three was any indian associated even remotely or in any capacity.
the british created a new system of administration in india to serve their purposes.
but before we discuss the salient features of this system, it would be better if we first examine the purposes which it was designed to serve, for the main function of the administrative system of a country is to accomplish the aims and objects of its rulers.
the chief aim of the british was to enable them to exploit india economically to the maximum advantage of various british interests, ranging from the company to the lancashire manufacturers.
at the same time india was to be made to bear the full cost of its own conquest as well as of the foreign rule.
an examination of the economic policies of the british in india is, therefore, of prime importance.
british economic policies in india, 17571857 commercial policy from 1600 to 1757 the east india companys role in india was that of a trading corporation which brought goods or precious metals into india and exchanged them for indian goods like textiles, spices, etc., which it sold abroad.
its profits came primarily from the sale ofindian goods abroad.
naturally, it tried constantly to open new markets for indian goods in britain and other countries.
thereby, it increased the export of indian manufactures and thus encouraged their production.
this is the reason why the indian rulers tolerated and even encouraged the establishment of the companys factories in india.
the structure of the government 93 bat, from the very beginning, the british manufacturers were jealous of the popularity that indian textiles enjoyed in britain.
all of a sudden dress fashions changed and light cotton textiles began to replace the coarse woollens of the english.
defoe, the writer of the famous novel, robinson crusoe, complained that indian cloth had crept into our houses, our closets and bed chambers curtains, cushions, chairs, and at last beds themselves were nothing but calicos or india stuffs the british manufacturers put pressure on tlieii government to restrirt and prohibit the sale of indian goods in england.
by 1720 laws had been passed forbidding the wear or use of punted or dyed cotton cloth.
in 1760 a lady had to pay a fine of  200 for possessing an imported handkerchief moreover, heavy duties were imposed on the import of plain cloth.
other european countries, except holland, also either prohibited the import of indian cloth or imposed heavy import duties.
in spite of these laws, however, indian silk and cotton textiles still held their own in foreign markets, until the middle of the 18th century when the english textile industry began to develop on the basis of new and advanced technology.
after the battle of plassey in 1757 th pattern of the companys commercial relations with india underwent a qualitative change.
now the company could use its political control over bengal to push its indian trade.
moreover, it utilised the weaverworking in a pit loom with throws tint tit courtesy national archives of mia new delhi 94 modern india revenues of bengal to finance its export of indian goods.
the activity of the company should have encouraged indian manufacturers, but this was not so.
the company used its political power to dictate terms to the weavers of bengal who were forced to sell their products at a cheaper and dictated price, even at a loss.
moreover, their labour was no longer free.
many of them were compelled to work for the company for low wages and were forbidden to work for indian merchants.
the company eliminated its rival traders, both indian and foreign, and prevented them from offering higher wages or pn s to the bengal handicraftsmen.
the servants of the company monoyolised the talc of raw cotton and made the bengal weaver pay exorbitant prices for it.
thus, the weaver lost both ways, as buyer as well as seller.
at the same time, indian textiles had to pay heavy duties on entering england.
the british government was determined to protect its rising machine industry whose products could still not compete with the cheaper and better indian goods.
even so indian products held some of their ground.
the real blow on indian handicrafts fell after 1813 when they lost not only their foreign markets but, what was of much greater importance, their market in india itself.
the industrial revolution in britain completely transformed britains economy and its economic relations with india.
during the second half of the 18th century and the first few decades of the 19th century, britain underwent profound social and economic transformation, and biitish industry developed and expanded rapidly on the basis of modern machines, the factory system, and capitalism.
this development was aided by several factors.
british overseas trade had been expanding rapidly in the previous centuries.
britain had come to capture and monopolise many foreign markets by means of war and colonialism.
these export markets enabled its export industries to expand production rapidly, utilizing the latest techniques in production and organisation.
africa, the west indies, latin america, canada, australia, china and above all india provided unlimited opportunities for export.
this was particularly true of the cotton textile industry which served as the main vehicle of the industrial revolution in britain.
britain had already evolved the colonial pattern of trade which helped the industrial revolution which in turn strengthened this pattern the colonies and underdeveloped countries exported agricultural and mineral raw.
materials to britain while the latter sold them its manufactures.
secondly, there was sufficient capital accumulated in the country for investment in new machinery and the factory system.
moreover, this capital was concentrated not in the hands of the feudal class which would waste it in luxurious living but in the hands of merchants and industrialists who were keen to invest it in trade and industry.
here again the immense wealth drawn from africa, asia, the west indies, and latin america, including that drawn from india by the east india company and its servants after the battle of plassey, played an important role in financing industrial expansion.
thirdly, rapid increase in population met the need of the growing industries for more labour and cheaper labour.
the population of britain increased rapidly after 1740 it doubled in fifty years after 1780. fourthly, britain had a government which was under the influence of the structure of the government 95 commercial and manufacturing interests and which, therefore, fought other countries determinedly for markets and colonies.
fifthly, the demands for increased production were met by developments in technology.
britains rising industry cofild base itself on the inventions of hargreaves, watt, crompton, cartwright, and many others.
many of the inventions now utilisedhad been available for centuries.
in order to take full advantage of these inventions and steampower, production was now increasingly concentrated in factories.
it should be noted that it was not these inventions which produced the industrial revolution, rather it was the desire of manufacturers to increase production rapidly for the expanding markets and their capacity to invest the needed capital which led ftcm to utilise the existing technology and to call forth new inventions.
in fact, new organisation of industry was to make technical change a permanent feature of human development.
the industrial revolution has, in this sense, never comc to an end, for modern industry and technology have gone on developing from one stage to another ever since the middle of the 18th century.
the industrial revolution transformed british society in a fundamental manner.
it led to rapid economic development which is the foundation of todays high standard of living in britain as well as in europe, the soviet union, the u.s.a., canada, australia, and japan.
in fact, until the beginning of the 19th century, the difference in the standards of living of what are today economically the advanced and the backward countries was very slight.
it was the absence of the industrial revolution in the latter group of countries which has led to the immense income gap that we see in the world of today.
britain became increasingly urbanised as a result of the industrial revolution.
more and more men began to live in factory towns.
in 1730, britain had only two cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants in 1851, their number was 29. two entirely new classes of society were born the industrial capitalists, who owned the factories, and workers who hired out their labour on daily wages.
while the former class developed rapidly, enjoying unprecedented prosperity, the workersthe labouring poorin the beginning reaped a harvest of sorrow.
they were uprooted from their rural surroundings and their traditional way oflife was disrupted and destroyed.
they had now to live in cities which were full of smoke and filth.
housing was utterly inadequate and insanitary.
most of them lived in dark, sunless slums which have been described so well by charles dickens in his novels.
hours of work in the factories and mines were intolerably longoften going up to 14 or 16 hours a day.
wages were very low.
women and children had to work equally hard.
sometimes 4 or 5year old children were employed in factories and mines.
in general, a workers life was one of poverty, hard work, disease, and malnutrition.
it was only after the middle of the 19th century that improvement in their incomes began to take place, the rise of a powerful class of manufacturers had an important impact on indian administration and its policies.
as this class grew in number and strength and political influence, it began to attack the trade monopoly of the company.
since the profits of this class came from manufacturing and not trade, it wanted to 96 modern india encourage not imports of manufactures from india but exports of its own products to india as well as imports of raw materials like raw cotton from india, in 1769 the british industrialists compelled the company by law to export every year britisn manufactures amounting to over  380,000, even though it suffered a loss on the transaction.
in 1793, the1 forced the company to grant them the use of 3,000 tons of its shipping every year to carry their goods.
exports of british cotton goods to the east, mostly to india, increased from  156 in 1794 to nearly  110,000 in 1813, that is, by nearly 700 times, but this increase was not enough to satisfy the wild hopes of the lancashire manufacturers who began to actively search for ways and means of promoting the export of their products to india, as r.c.
dutt pointed out later in 1901 in his famous work, the economic history of india, the effort of the parliamentary select committee of 1812 was to discover how they indian manufactures could be replaced by british manufactures, and how british industries could be promoted at the expense of indian industries.
the british manufacturers looked upon the east india company, its monopoly of eastern trade, and its methods of exploitation of india through control of indias revenues and export trade, to be the chief obstacles in the fulfilment of their dreams.
between 1793 and 1813, they launched a powerful campaign against the company and its commercial privileges and, finally succeeded in 1813 in abolishing its monopoly of indian trade.
with this event, a new phase in britains economic relations with india began.
agricultural india was to be made an economic colony of industrial england.
the government of india now followed a policy of free trade or unrestricted entry of british goods.
indian handicrafts were exposed to the fierce and unequal competition of the machinemade products of britain and faced extinction.
india had to admit british goods free or at nominal tariff rates.
the government of india also tried to increase the number of purchasers of british goods by following a policy of fresh conquests and direct occupation of protected states tike avadh.
many british officials, political leaders, and businessmen advocated reduction in land revenue so that the indian peasant mignt be in a better position to buy foreign manufactures they also advocated the modernisation of india so that more and more indians might develop a taste for western goods.
indian handmade goods were unable to compete against the much cheaper products of british mills which had been rapidly improving their productive capacity by using inventions and a wider use of steam power.
any government wedded to indian interests alone would have protected indian industry through high tariff walls and used the time thus gained to import the new techniques of the west britain had done this in relation to its own industries in the 18th century france, germany, and the u s.a. weie also doing no at the time japan and the soviet union were to do it many decades ater and free india is doing it today.
however, not only were tndiai industries not protected by the foreign rulers but foreign goods were g ven free entry.
foreign imports rose rapidly.
imports of british cotton goods alone increased from  110,000 in 1813 to  6,300,000 in 1856. while tbe doors of india were thus thrown wide open to foreign goods, indian handicraft products continued to pay heavy duties on entry into britain.
the british would not take in indian goods on fair and equal terms even at this stage when their the structure of the government 97 industries had achieved technological superiority over indian handicrafts.
duties in britain on several categories of indian goods continued to be high till their export to britain virtually ceased.
for example, in 1824, a duty of 67 per cent was levied on indian calicos and a duty of 37 per cent on indian muslins.
indian sugar had to pay on entry into britain a duty that was over three times its cost pi ice.
in some cases duties in f.ngland went up as high as 400 per cent.
as a result of such prohibitive import duties and development .of machine industries, indian exports to foreign countries fell rapidly.
the unfairness of british commercial policy has been summed up by the british historian, h.h.
wilson, in the following words   .
it was staled in evidence, that he cotton and silk goods of india up o this period could be sold for a profit in the british market, at a price from 50 to 60 per cent lower ban those fabricated in england.
it consequently became necessary to protect the latter by duties of 70 to 80 per cent on tbeir value, or by positive prohibition.
had this not been the case, had not such prohibitory duties and decrees existed, the mills of paisley and of manchester would have been stopped in their outset and could scarcely have been again set m motion, even by the power of meam.
they were created by the sacrifice of the indian manufacture.
had india been independent, she would have retaliated, would have imposed preventive duties upon british goods, and would thus have preserved her own productive industry from annihilation.
this act of self defence was not permitted her she was at the mercy of the stranger.
british goods were forced upon her without paying any duty and the foreign manufacturer employed the arm of political injustice to keep down and ultimately strangle a competitor with whom he could not have contended on equal terms.
instead of exporting manufactures, india was now forced to export raw materials like raw cotton and raw silk which british industries needed urgently, or plantation products like indigo and tea, or foodgrains which were in short supply in britain.
in 1856, india exported  4,300,000 worth of raw cotton, only  810,000 worth of cotton manufactures,  2,900,000 worth of foodgrains,  1,730,000 worth of indigo, and  770,000 , worth of raw silk.
the british also promoted the sale of indian opium in china even though the chinese put a ban on it because of its poisonous and other harmful qualities.
but the trade yielded large profits to british merchants and fat revenues to the companycontrolled administration of india.
interestingly enough, the import of opium into britain was strictly banned.
thus, the commercial policy of the east tndia company after 1813 was guided by the needs of british industry.
its main aim was to transform india into a consumer of british manufactures and a supplier of raw materials.
the drain of wealth the british exported to britain part of indias wealth and resources for which india got no adequate economic or material return this economic drain was peculiar to british rule even the worst of previous indian governments had spent the revenue they extracted from the people inside the country.
whether they spent it on irrigation canals and trunk roads, or on palaces, temples and mosques, or on wars and conquests, or even oa personal luxury, it ultimately encouraged indian trade and industry or gave employment to indians.
this was so because even foreign conquerors, for example the mughals, soon settled in india and made it their home.
but the british remained perpetual foreigners, englishmen working anl trading id india 98 modern india nearly always planed to go back to brjtain, and the,indian qovemment was controlled by a. foreign company of merchants and the government of briai.
the british, consequently, spent.a large part of the, taxes .and income they derived from indian people not in india but in britain, tfyeifrhofnecpuotry.
the drain of wealth from bengal began in 1757 when th companys servants began to carry home immense fortunes extorted from indian rulers, zamindars, merchants and the common people.
they sent home nearly  6 million between 1758 and 1765. this amount was more than four times the total land revenue collection of the nawab of bengal in 1765. this amount of drain did not include the trading profits of the company which were often no less illegally derived.
in 1765 the company acquired the dewani of bengal and thus gained control over its revenues.
the company, even more than its servants, soon directly organised the drain.
it began to purchase indian goods out of the revenue of bengal and to export them.
these purchases were known as investments thus, through investments, bengals revenue was sent to england.
for example, from 1765 to 1770, the company sent out in the form of goods nearly four million pounds or about 33 per cent of the net revenue of bengal.
the actual drain was even more, as a large part of the salaries and other incomes of english officials and the trading fortunes of english merchants also found their way into england.
while the exact amount of the annual dram has not been calculated so far and historians differ on its quantum, the fact of the drain, at least from 1757 to 1857, was widely accepted by british officials.
thus, for example, lord ellenborough, chairman of the select committee of the house of lords, and later governor general of india, admitted in 1840 lhat india was required to transmit annually to this country britain, without any return except in the small value of military stores, a sum amounting to between two and three million sterling.
and john sullivan, president of the board of revenue, madras, remarked our system acts very much like a sponge, drawing up all the good things from the banks jf the ganges, and squeezing them down on the banks of the thames.
development of means of transport and communication up to the middle of the 19th century, the means of transport in india were backward.
they were confined to bullockcart, camel, and packhorse.
the british rulers soon realised that a cheap and easy system of transport was a necessity if british manufactures were to flow into indi on a large scale and her raw materials secured for british industries.
they introduced steamships on the rivers and set abo,ut improving the.
roads, wqrk on the grand trunk road from calcutta to qlhj  was begun in 1839 and completed in the 1850s.
eftojts were also mad to link by road the major cities, ports, and markets of th, but real improvement in transport came only, with tfte, c.opiijiifi oj .fog, railways.
the first,railway engine designed by qorg stephwi0n th rails in england in 1814. railways developed rapidfyviw during the 1830s and 1840s.
pressure soon mounted for their speedy construction in india.
the british manufacturers hoped thereby to open the vast and hitherto untapped market in the interior of the country and to facilitate the export of indian raw materials and foodstuffs to feed their hungry machines and the structure of the government 99 operatives.
the british bankers and investors looked upon railway development in india as a channel for safe investment of their surplus capital.
the british steel manufacturers regarded it as an outlet for their products like rails, engines, wagons, and other machinery and plant.
the government of india soon fell in step with these views and found additional merit in the railways they would enable it to administer the country more effectively and efficiently and to protect their regime from internal rebellion or external aggression by enabling more rapid mobilization and movement of troops.
the earliest suggestion to build a railway in india was made in madras in 1831. flui the wagons of this railway were to be drawn by horses.
construction of steamdriven railways in india was first proposed in 1834 in england.
it was given strong political support by englands railway promoters, financiers, mercantile houses trading with india, and textile manufacturers.
it was decided that the indian railways were .to be constructed and operated by private companies who were guaranteed a minimum of five per cent return on their capital by the government of india, the first railway line running from bombay to thana was opened to traffic in 1853. lord dalhousie, who became governorgeneral of india in 1849, was an ardent advocate of rapid railway construction.
in a famous note, written in 1853, he laid down an extensive programme of railway development, he proposed a network of four main trunk lines which would link the interior of the country with the big ports and interconnect the different parts of the country.
by the end of 1869 more than 4,000 miles of railways had been built by the guaranteed companies but this system proved very cosily and slow, and so in 1869 the government of india decided to build new railways as stale enterprises.
but the speed of railway extension still did not satisfy officials in india and businessmen in britain.
after 1880, railways were built through private enterprise as welt as state agency.
by 1905, nearly 28,0 miles of railways had been built.
three important aspects of the development of indian railways should be kept in view.
firstly, nearly the entire amount of over 350 crores of rupees invested in them was provided by british investors, indian capital contributing only a negligible share of it.
secondly, they were for the first 50 years financially losing concerns which were not able to pay interest on the capital invested in them.
thirdly, in their planning, construction and management, itke economic and political development of india and her people was not 100 modern india h iirc rrah a messenger courtesy national archives tf india, ntw delhi kept in ihc forefront.
on the contrary, the primary consideration was lo serve the economic, political, and military interests of british imperialism in india.
the railway lines were laid primarily with a view to link indias raw material producing a reps in the interior with the ports of export.
the needs of indian industries regarding their markets and thejr sourccs of raw materials were neglected.
moreover, the railway rates were fixed in a manner so as to favour imports and exports and to discrimine against internal movement of goods.
several railway lines in burma and northwestern india were built at high cost to serve british imperial interests.
the british also established an efficient and modern postal system and introduced the telegraph.
the first telegraph line from calcutta to agra was opened in 1853. lord dalhousie introduced postage stamps.
previously cash payment had to be made when a letter was posted.
he also cut down postal rates and charged a uniform rate of half an anna for a letter all over the land.
before his reforms, the postage on a letter depended on the distance it was to travel in some cases the postage on a letter was the equivalent of as much as four days wages of a skilled indian worker land revenue policy the main burden of providing money for the trade and profits of the company, the cost of administration, and the wars of british expansion in india had to be borne by the indian peasant or ryot.
in fact the british could not have conquered such a vast country as india if they had not taxed him heavilyi the indian state had since times immemorial taken a part of the agri the structure of the government 101 cultural produce u land revenue.
it had done so either directly through its servants or indirectly through intermediaries, such as zamindars, revenuefarmers, etc., who collected the land revenue from the cultivator and kept a part of it as their commission.
these intermediaries were primarily collectors of land revenue, although they did sometimes own some land in the area from which they collected revenue.
the permanent settlement we have seen that in 1765, the east india company acquired the dewani, or control over the revenues, of bengal, bihar, and orissa.
initially, it made an attempt to continue the old system of revenue collection though it increased the amount to be collected from rs.
14,290,000 in 1722 and rs.
8,110,000 in 1764 to rs.
23,400,000 in 1771. in 1773, it decided to manage the land revenues directly.
warren hastings auctioned the right to collect revenue to the highest bidders.
but his experiment did not succeed.
though the amount of land revenue was pushed high by zamindars and other speculators bidding against each other, the actual collection varied from year to year and seldom came up to official expectations.
this introduced instability in the companys revenues at a time when the company was hard pressed for money.
moreover, neither the ryot nor the zamindar would do anything to improve cultivation when they did not know what the next years assessment would be or who would be the next years revenue collector.
it was at this stage that the idea first emerged of fixing the land revenue at a permanent amount.
finally, after prolonged discussion and debate, the permanent settlement was introduced in bengal and bihar in 1793 by lord cornwallis.
it had two special features.
firstly, the zamindars and revenue collectors were converted into so many landlords.
they were not only to act as agents of the government in collecting land revenue from the ryot hut also to become the owners of the entire land ia their zamindaris.
their right of ownership was made hereditary and transferable.
on the other hand the cultivators were reduced to the low status of mere tenants and were deprived of longstanding rights to the soil and other customary rights.
the use of the pasture and forest lands, irrigation canals, fisheries, and homestead plots and protection against enhancement of rent were some of their rights which were sacrificed.
in fact the tenantry of bengal was left entirely at the mercy of the zamindars.
this was done so that the zamindars might be able to pay in time the exorbitant land revenue demand of the company.
secondly, the zamindars were to give, 1011th of the rental they derived from the peasantry to the state, keeping only 111th for themselves.
but the sums to be paid by them as land revenue were fixed in perpetuity.
if the rental of a zamindars estate increased due to extension of cultivation and improvement in agriculture, or his capacity to extract more from hla tenants, or any other reason, he would keep the entire amount of the increase.
the slate would not make any further demand upon him.
at the same time, the zamindar had to pay his revenue rigidly on the due date even if the crop had failed for some reason otherwise his lands were to be sold.
the initial fixation of revenue was made arbitrarily and without any consultation with the zamindars.
the attempt of the officials was to secure the maximum amount.
as a result, the rates of levenue were fixed very high.
john 102 modern india shore, the man who planned the permanent settlement and later succeeded cornwallis as governorgeneral, calculated that if the gross produce of bengal be taken as 100, the government claimed 45, zamindars and other intermediaries below them received 15, and only 40 remained with the actual cultivator.
it was later generally admitted by officials and nonofficials alike that before 1793 the zamindars of bengal and bihar did not enjoy proprietary rights over most of the land.
the question then arises why did the british recognise them as such one explanation is that this was in part the result of a misunderstanding.
in england, the central figure in agriculture at the time was the landlord and the british officials made the mistake of thinking that the zamindar was his indian counterpart.
it is, however, to be noted that in one crucial respect the british officials clearly differentiated between the positions of the two.
the landlord in britain was the owner of land not only in relation to the tenant but also m relation to the state.
but in bengal while the zamindar was landlord over the tenant, he was further subordinated to the state.
in fact he was reduced virtually to the status of a tenant of the east india company, in contrast to the british landlord, who paid a small share of his income as land tax, he had to pay as 1ax 1011th of his income from the land of which he was supposed to be the owner and he could be turned out of the land unceremoniously and his estate sold if he failed to pay the revenue in time.
other historians think that the decision to recognise the zamindars as the proprietors of land was basically determined by political, financial, and administrative expediency.
here the guiding factors were three.
the first arose out of clever statecraft the need to create political allies.
the british officials realised that as they were foreigners in india, their rule would be unstable unless they acquired local supporters who would act as a buffer between them and the people of india.
this argument had immediate importance as there were a large number of popular revolts in bengal during the last quarter of the 18th century.
so they brought into existence a wealthy aiid privileged class of zamindars which owed its existence to british rule and which would, therefore, be compelled by its own basic interests to support it.
this expectation was, in fact, fully justified later when the zamindars as a class supported the foreign government in opposition to the rising movement for freedom, second, and perhaps the predominant motive, was that of financial security.
before 1793 the company was troubled by fluctuations in its chief source of income, the land revenue.
the permanent settlement guaranteed the stability of income.
the newly created property of the zamindars acted as a secuiily of this.
moreover, the permanent settlement enabled the company to maximise its income as land revenue was now fixed higher than it had ever been in the past.
collection of revenue through a small number of zammdars seemed to be much simpler and cheaper than the process of dealing with lakhs of cultivators.
thirdly, the permanent settlement was expected to increase agricultural production.
since the land revenue would not be increased in future even if the zamindars income went up, the latter would be inspired to extend cultivation and improve agricultural productivity.
the permanent zamindari settlement was later extended to orissa, the northern the structure of the government 103 districts of madras, and the district of varanasi.
in parts of central india and avadh the british introduced a temporary zamindari settlement under which the zamindars were made owners of land but the revenue they had to pay was revised periodically.
another group of landlords was created all over india when the government started the practice of giving land to persons who had rendered faithful service to the foreign rulers.
ryotwari settlement the establishment of british rule in south and south western india brought new problems of land settlement.
the officials believed that in these regions there were no zamindars with large estates with whom settlement of land revenue could be made and that the introduction of zamindari system would upset the existing state of affairs.
many madras officials led by reed and munro recommended that settlement should therefore be made directly with the actual cultivators.
they also pointed out that under the permanent settlement the company was a financial loser as it had to share the revenues with the zamindars and could not claim a share of the growing income from land.
moreover, the cultivator was left at the mercy of the zamindar who could oppress him at will.
under the system they proposed, which is known as the ryotwari settlement, the cultivator was to be recognised as the owner of his plot of land subject to the payment of land revenue.
the supporters of the ryotwari system claimed that it was a continuation of the state of affairs that had existed in the past.
munro said it is the system which has always prevailed in i n d i a 1 t h e ryotwari settlement was in the end introduced in parts of the madras and bombay presidencies in the beginning of the 19th century.
the settlement under the ryotwari system tvas not made permanent.
it was revised periodically after 20 to 30 years when the revenue demand was usually raised.
the ryotwari settlement did not bring into existence a system of peasant ownership.
the peasant soon discovered that the large number of zamindars had been replaced by one giant zamindarthe state in fact, thfe government later openly claimed that land revenue was rent and not a tax.
the ryots rights of ownership of his land were also negated by three other factors 1 in most areas the land revenue fixed was exorbitant the ryot was hardly left with bare maintenance even in the best of seasons.
for instance, in madras the government claim was axed as high as 45 to 55 per cent of gross production in the earlier settlement.
the situation was nearly as bad in bombay.
2 the government retained the right to enhance land revenue at will.
3 the ryot had to pay revenue even when his produce was partially or wholly destroyed by drought or floods.
mahalwari system a modified version of the zamindari settlement, introduced in the gangetic valley, the northwest provinces, parts of central india, and the punjab, was known as the mahalwari system.
the revenue settlement was to be made village by village or estate mahal by estate with landlords or heads of families who collectively claimed to be the landlords of the village or the estate.
in the punjab a modified mahalwari system known as the village system was introduced.
in mahalwari areas also, the land revenue was periodically revised.
both the zamindari and the ryotwari systems departed fundamentally from the traditional land systems of the country.
the british created a new form of private 104 modern india property in land in such a way that the benefit of the innovation did not go to the cultivators.
all over the country land was now made salable, mortgagable, and alienable.
this was done primarily to protect the governments revenue.
if land had not been made transferable or salable, the government would find it very difficult to realise revenue from a cultivator who had no savings or possessions out of which to pay it.
now he could borrow money on the security of his land or even 11 part of it and pay his land revenue.
if he refused to do so, the government could and often did auction his land and realise the amount.
another reason for introducing private ownership in land was provided by the belief that only right of ownership would make the landlord or the ryot exert himself in making improvements.
the british by making land a commodity which could be freely bought and sold introduced a fundamental change in the existing land systems of the country.
the stability and the continuity of the indian villages were shaken.
in fact, the entire structure of rural society began to break up.
105 modprn india e x e r c i s e s trace the evolution of the east india companys relations with the british state, from 1765 to 1833. bring out the major factors which influenced these relations.
2. examine critically the commercial policy pursued by britain in india from 1757 to 1857.
3. in what way did the british land revenue policy transform agrarian relations in india 4. write short notes oft a the regulating act of 1773 and the powers of the governorgsreval b the industrial revolution c the drain of wealth from d development of the railways.
c h a p t e r v i administrative organisation and social and cultural policy e have seen in the previous chapter that by 1784 the east india companys administration of india had been brought under its control by the british government and that its economic policies were being determined by the needs of british economy.
we vill now discuss the organisation through which the company administered its recently acquired dominion.
in the beginning the company left the administration of its possessions in india in indian hands, confining its activities to supervision.
but it soon found that british aims were not adequately served by following old methods of administration.
consequently, tbe company took all aspects of administration in its own hand, under warren hastings and cornwallis, the administration of bengal was completely overhauled and the foundations of a new system based on the english pattern laid.
the spread of british power to new areas, new problems, new needs, new experiences and new ideas led to changes in the system of administration.
but the overall objectives of imperialism were never forgotten.
the british administration in india was based on three pillars the civil service, the army, and the police.
this was so for two reasons.
for one, the chief aim of britishindian administration was the maintenance of law and order and the perpetuation of british rule.
without law and order british merchants and british manufacturers could not hope to sell their goods in every nook and corner of india.
again, the british, being w 106 modern india foreigners, could not hope to win the affections of the indian people they, therefore, relied on superior force rather than on public support for the maintenance 0f their control over india.
hie duke of wellington, who had served in india tfnder his brother, lord wellesley, remarked after his return to europe tbe system of government in india, ,the foundation of authority, and the modes of supporting it and of carrying on the operation of government arc entirely different from the systems and modes adopted in europefor the tame purpose.... the foundation tad the instrument of all power there is the sword.
civil service the civil service was brought into existence by lord cornwallis.
as we have seen in an earlier chapter, the east india company had from the beginning carried on its trade in the east through servants who were paid low wages but who were permitted to trade privately.
later, when the company became a territorial power, the same servants assumed administrative functions.
they now became extremely corrupt, by oppressing local weavers and artisans, merchants, and zamindars, by extorting bribes and gifts from rajas and nawabs, and by indulging in illegal private trade, they amassed uotold wealth with which they retired to england.
clive and warren hastings made attempts to put an end to their corruption, but were only partially successful.
cornwallis, who came to india as governorgeneral in 1786, was determined to purify the administration, but he realised that the companys servants would not give honest and efficient service so long as they were not given adequate salaries.
he therefore enforced the rules against private trade and acceptance of presents and bribes by officials with strictness.
at the same time, he raised the salaries of the companys servants.
for example, the collector of a district was to be paid rs.
1500 a month and one per cent commission on the revenue collection of his district.
in fact the companys civil service became the highest paid service in the world.
cornwallis also laid down that promotion in the civil service would be by seniority so that its members would remain independent of outside influence.
in 1800, lord wellesley pointed out that even though civil servants often ruled over vast areas, they came to india at the immature age of 18 or so and were given no regular training before starting on their jobs.
they generally lacked knowledge of indian languages.
wellesley therefore established the college of fort william at calcutta for the education of young recruits to the civil service.
the directors of the company disapproved of his action and in 1806 replaced it by their own east indian college at haileybury in england.
till 1853 all appointments to the civil service were made by the directors of the east india company who placated the members of the board of control by letting them make some of the nominations, the directors fought hard to retain this lucrative and prized privilege and refused to surrender it even when their other economic and political privileges were taken away by parliament.
they lost it finally in 18s3 when the charter act decreed that all recruits to the civil service were to be selected through a competitive examination.
a special feature of the indian civil service since the days of cornwallis was the rigid and complete exclusion of indians from it, it was laid down officially in 1793 that all higher posts in administration worth more than administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 108  500 a year in salary were to be held by englishmen.
this policy was also applied to other branches of government, such as the army, police, judiciary, engineering.
in the words of john shore, who succeeded cornwallis the fundamental principle of the english had been to make the whole indian nation subservient, in every possible way, to the interests and benefits of ourselves.
the indians have been excluded from every honour, dignity, or office, which the lowest englishmen could be prevailed to accept.
why did the british follow such a policy many factors combined to produce it.
for one, they were convinced that an administration based on british ideas, institutions, and practices could be firmly established only by english personnel.
and, then, they did not trust the ability and integrity of the indians.
for example, charles grant, chairman of the court of directors, condemned the people of india as a race of men lamentably degenerate and base retaining but a feeble sense of moral obligation... and sunk in misery by their vices.
similarly, cornwallis believed that every native of hindustan is corrupt.
it may be noted that this criticism did apply to some extent to a small class of indian officials and zamindrs of the time.
but, then, it was equally if not more true of british officials in india, in fact, cornwallis had proposed to give them high salaries in order to help them resist temptations and to become honest and obedient.
but he never thought of applying the same remedy of adequate salaries to eradicate corruption among indian officials, in reality, the exclusion of indians from higher grades of services was a deliberate policy.
these services were required at the time to establish and consolidate british rule in india.
obviously the task could not be left to indians who did not possess the same instinctive sympathy for, and understanding of, british interests as englishmen.
moreover, the influential classes of british society were keen to preserve the monopoly of lucrative appointments in the indian civil service and other services for their sons.
in fact they fought tooth and nail among themselves over these appointments.
the right to make them was a perpetual bone of contention between the directors of the company and the members of the british cabinet.
how could the english then agree to let indians occupy these posts indians were, however, recruited in large numbers to fill subordinate posts as they were cheaper and much more readily available than englishmen.
the indian civil service gradually developed into one of the most efficient and powerful civil services in the world.
its members exercised vast power and often participated ,in the making of policy.
they developed certain traditions of independence, integrity, and hard work, though these qualities obviously served british and not indian interests, at the same time they gradually came to form a rigid and exclusive and proud caste with an extremely conservative and narrow outlook.
they came o believe that they had an almost divine right to rule india.
the indian civil service has often been called the steel frame1 which reared and sustained british rule in india.
in course of time it became the chief opponent of all that was progressive and advanced in indian life and one of the main targets of attack by the rising indian national administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 109 movement.
army the second important pillar of the british regime in india was the army.
it fulfilled three important functions.
jt was the instrument through which the indian powers were conquered it defended the british empire in india from foreign rivals and it safeguarded british supremacy from the everpresent threat of internal revolt.
the bulk of the companys army consisted of indian soldiers, recruited chiefly from the area at present included in u.p.
and bihar.
for instance, in 1857, the strength of the army in india was 311,400 of whom 265,900 were indians.
its officers were, however, exclusively british, at least since the days of cornwallis.
in 1856, only three indians in the army recieved a salary of rs.
300 per month and the highest indian officer was a subedar.
a large number of indian troops had to be employed as british troops were far too expensive.
moreover, the population of britain was perhaps too small to provide the large soldiery needed for the conquest of india.
as a counterweight, the army was officered entirely by british officials and a certain number of british troops were maintained to keep the indian soldiers under control.
even so, it appears surprising today that a handful of foreigners coul d conquer and control india with a predominantly indian army.
this was possible because of two factors.
on the one hand, there was absence of modem nationalism in the country at the time.
a soldier from bihar or avadh did not think, and could not have thought, that in helping the company defeat the marathas or the punjabis he was being antiindian on the other, the indian soldier had a long tradition of loyally serving those who paid his salary.
this was popularly known as loyalty to the salt.
in other words, the indian soldier was a good mercenary, and the company on its part was a good paymaster.
it paid its soldiers regularly and well, something that the indian rulers and chieftains were no longer dping.
police the third pillar of british rule was the police whose creator was once again cornwallis.
he relieved he zamindars of their police.functions and, established a regular police force to maintain law and order.
in this respect, he went, back to, and modernized, the old indian system 5f thaws.
interestingly, this put india ahead of britain where a system of police had not developed yet.
cornwallis established a system of circles or thanas headed by a daroga, who was an indian.
later, the post of the district superintendent of police was created to head the police organisation in a district.
once again, indians were excluded from all superior posts.
in the villages the duties of the police continued to be performed by villagewatchmen who were maintained by the villagers.
the police gradually succeeded in reducing major crimes such as dacoity.
one of its major achievements was the suppression of thugs who robbed and killed travellers on the highways, particularly in central india.
the police also prevented the organisation of a large scale conspiracy against foreign control, 110 modern india and when the national movement arose, the police was used to suppress it.
in its dealings with the people, the indian police adopted an unsympathetic attitude.
a committee of parliament reported in 1813 that the police committed depradations on the peaceable inhabitants, of the same nature as those practised by the dacoits whom they were employed to suppress.
and william bentinck, the governorgeneral, wrote in 1832 as for the police 50 far from being a protection to the people, i cannot letter illustrate the public feeling regarding it, than by the following tact, that nothing can exceed the popularity of a recent regulation by which, if  robbery has been committed, the police are prevented rom making any enquiry into it, eiccpt upon the requisition of the persons robbed that is to say, the shepherd is a more rave nous beast of prey than the wolf.
judicial organisation the british laid the foundations of a new system of dispensing justice through a hierarchy of civil and criminal courts.
though given a start by warren hastings, the system was stabilised by cornwallis in 1793. in each district was established a diwani adafat, or civil court, presided over by the district judge who belonged to the civil service.
cornwallis thus separated the posts of the civil judge and the collector.
appeal from thei district court lay first to four provincial courts of civil appeal and then, finally, to the sadar diwani adalat.
below the district court were registrars courts, headed by europeans, and a number of subordinate courts headed by indian judges known as munsifs and amins.
to deal with criminal cases, cornwallis divided the presidency of bengal into four divisions, in each of which a court of circuit presided over by the civil servants was established.
below these courts came a large number of indian, magistrates to try petty oases.
appeals from th courts of circuit lay.
witft the sadftr nlzamat adalat.
the, criminal coorls applied muslim criminal j law in.
a. modified and less harsh form so that the teariflg apact of limbs and .
such olherpumshmentswercprohibited, the eml ceucs0pyed ih ,gistomary law thiyhadpwyailed in any area ojr among a section of the people since times immemorial.
in 1831, william bentinck abolished the provincial courts of appeal and circuit.
their work was assigned first to commissions and later to district judges and district collectors.
bentinck also raised the status and powers of indians in the judicial service and appointed them as deputy magistrates, subordinate judges and principal sadar amins.
in 185, high courts were established at calcutta, madras and bombay to replace the sadar courts ofdiwani and nizamat.
the british also established a new system of laws through the processes of enactment and codification of old laws.
the traditional system of justice in india had been largely based on customary law which arose from long tradition and practice, though many laws were based on the shastras and sharial as well as on imperial authority.
though they continued to observe customary law in general, the british gradually evolved a new system of laws.
they introduced regulations, codified the existing laws, and often systematised and modernised them through judicial interpretation.
the charter act of 1833 conferred all lawmaking power administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 111 on the governorgeneralincouncil.
all this meant that indians were now to live increasingly under manmade laws, which might be good or bad but which were openly the products of human rtason, and not under laws which had to be obeyed blindly and which could not be questioned as they were supposed to be divine and therefore sacred.
in 1833, the government appointed a law commission headed by lord macaulay to codify indian laws.
its labours eventually resulted in the indian penal code, the westernderived codes of civil and criminal procedure and other codes of laws.
the same laws now prevailed all over the country and they were enforced by a uniform system of courts.
thus it may be said that india was judicially unified.
the rule of law the british introduced the modern concept of the rule of law.
this meant that their administration was to be carried out, at least in theory, in obedience to laws, which clearly defined the rights, privileges, and obligations of the subjects and not according to the caprice or personal discretion of the ruler.
in practice, of course, the bureaucracy and the police enjoyed arbitrary powers and interfered with the rights and liberties of the people.
one important feature of the concept of the rule of law was that any official could be brought before a court of law for breaches of official duty or for acts done in excess of his official authority.
the tule of law was to some extent a guarantee of the personal liberty of a person.
it is true that previous rulers of india had been in general bound by tradition and custotn.
but they always had the legal rightto take any administrative steps they wanted and there existed no other authority before whom their acts could be questioned.
the indian rulers and chiefs sometimes exercised this power to do as they wanted.
under british rule, on the other hand, administration was largely carried on according to laws as interpreted by the courts though the laws themselves were often defective, were made not by the people through a democratic process but autocratically by the foreign rulers, and left a great deal of power in the hands of the civil servants and the police.
but that was perhaps inevitable in a foreign regime that could not in the very nature of things be democratic or libertarian.
equality before law the indian legal system under the british was based on the concept of equality before law.
this meant that in the eyes of law all men were equal.
the same law applied to all persons irrespective of their caste, religion, or class.
previously, the judicial system had paid heed to caste distinctions and had differentiated between the socalled highborn and lowborn.
for the same crime lighter punishment was awarded to a brahmin than to a nonbrahmin.
similarly, in practice zamindars and nobles were not judged as harshly as the commoner.
in fact, very often they could not be brought to justice at all for their actions.
now the humble could also move the machinery of justice.
there was, however, one exception to this excellent principle of equality before law.
the europeans and their descendants had separate courts and even laws, in criminal cases they could be tried only by european judges.
many 112 modern india english officials, military officers, planters, and merchants behaved with indians in a haughty, harsh, and even brutal manner.
when efforts were made to bring them to justice, they were given indirect and undue protection and consequently light or no punishment by many of the european judges before whom alone they could be tried.
consequently, miscarriage of justice occurred frequently, iu practice, there emerged another type of legal inequality.
justice became quite expensive as court fees had to be paid, lawyers engaged, and the expenses of witnesses met.
courts were often situated in distant towns.
law suits dragged on for years.
the complicated laws were beyond the grasp of the illiterate and ignorant peasants.
invariably, the rich could turn and twist the laws and courts to operate in their own favour.
the mere threat to take a poor person through the long process of justice from the lower court to the highest court of appeal and thus to face him with complete ruin often sufficed to bring him to heel.
more over, the widespread prevalence of corruption in the ranks of the police and the rest of the administrative machinery led to the denial of justice.
officials often favoured the rich.
the zamindars oppressed the ryots without fear of official action.
in contrast, the system of justice that had prevailed in prebritish times was comparatively informal, speedy, and inexpensive.
thus, while the new judicial system marked a great step forward in so far as it was based on the laudable principles of the rule of law and equality before law and on rational and humane manmade laws, it was a retrograde step in some other respects it was now costlier and involved long delays.
sodal and cultural policy we have seen that british authorities reorganised and regulated indias economy in the interests of british trade and industry and organised a modern administrative system to guarantee order and security.
till 1813 they also followed a policy of noninterference in tbe religious, social, and cultural life of the country, hut after 1813 they took active steps to transform indian society and culture.
this followed the rise of new interests and new ideas in britain during the 19th century.
the industrial revolution, which had begun in the middle of the 18th century, and the consequent growth of industrial capitalism, were fast changing ali aspects of british society.
the rising industrial interests wanted to make india a big market for their goods.
this could not be accomplished merely by adhering to the policy of keeping peace, and required the partial trans formation and modernisation of indian society.
and so, in the words of the historians thompson and garratt, the mood and methods of the old brigandage were changing into those of modem industrialism and capitalism.
science and techonology also opened new vistas of human progress.
the 18th and 19th centuries witnessed a great ferment of new ideas in britain and europe which influenced the british outlook towards indian problems.
all over europe new attitudes of mind, manners, and morals were appearing.
the great french revolution of 1789 with its message of liberty, equality, and fraternity generated powerful democratic sentiments and unleashed the force of modem nationalism.
in the realm of thought, the new trend was represented by bacon, administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 113 locke, voltaire, rousseau, kant, adam smith, and bentham in the realm of literature by wordsworth, byron, shelley, and charles dickens.
the impact of the new thoughtthe product of the intellectual revolution of the 18th century, the french revolution, and the industrial revolutionwas naturally felt in india and affected the official notions of government.
the three outstanding characteristics of the new thought were rationalism or faith in reason and science, humanism or love of man, and confidence in the capacity of man to progress.
the rational and scientific attitude indicated that only that was true which was in conformity with human reason and capable of being tested in practice.
the scientific progress of the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries and the tremendous powers of production released by the application of science to industry were visible proofs of the power of human reason.
humanism was based on the belief that every human being was an end in himself and should be respected and prized as such.
no man had the right to look upon another human being as a mere agent of his own happiness.
the humanistic outlook gave birth to the doctrines of individualism, liberalism, and socialism.
according to the doctrine of progress, ail societies must change with time nothing was or could be static.
moreover, man had the capacity to remodel nature and society on rational and just lines.
the new currents of thought in europe came into conflict with the old outlook and produced a clash of attitudes among those who determined indian policy or ran the indian administration.
the older attitude, known as the conservative or traditional attitude, was that of making as few changes in india as possible.
the early representative of this attitude were warren hastings and edmund burke, the famous writer and parliamentarian, and the later ones were the famous officials munro, malcolm, elphinstone, and metcalfe.
the conservatives maintained that indian civilisation was different from european civilisation but was not necessarily inferior to it.
many of them respected and admired indian philosophy and culture.
realising that it might be necessary to introduce some western ideas and practices, they proposed to introduce them very very cautiously and gradually.
favouring social stability above all, they opposed any programme of rapid modernisation.
sweeping or hasty innovations, they felt, would produce a violent reaction in the country.
the conservative outlook remained influential in england as well as in india up to the very end of british rule.
in fact, the majority of british officials in india were generally of conservative persuation.
but among the policy makers in britain it was a gradually diminishing view because the course of trade and events was showing that the conservative policy did not lead to the desired expansion of trade or provide adequately for the perpetuation of british supremacy.
by 1800 the conservative attitude was fast giving way to a new attitude which was sharply critical of indian society and culture.
indian civilisation was condemned as static it was looked down upon with contempt, indian customs were considered uncivilised, indian institutions corrupt and decadent, and indian thought narrow and unscientific.
this critical approach was used by most of the officials and writers and statesmen of britain to justify political and economic 114 modern india enslavement of india and to proclaim that it was incapable of improvement and must therefore remain permanently under british tutelage.
however, a few englishmen, known as radicals, went beyond this narrow criticism and imperialistic outlook and applied the advanced humanistic and rational thought of the west to the indian situation as they saw it.
the doctrine of reason led them to believe that india need not always be a fallen country for all societies had the capacity to improve by following the dictates of reason and science.
the doctrine of humanism led them to desire the improvement of indian people.
the doctrine or progress led them to the conviction that indians were bound to improve.
and so the radicals, representing the better elements of british society, desired to make india a part of the modern progressive world of science and humanism.
the humanism of these men was aroused by the social injustice of such institutions as the caste system and untouchability, such customs as sail and infanticide, and the low status of women in general and of widows in particular.
their scientific minds were also outraged by the many superstitions that gripped the minds of the indian people and by the complete absence of the scientific outlook in the country.
to them, the answer to indias ills appeared to lie in the introduction of modern western sciences, philosophy, and literaturein fact, in all out and rapid modernisation.
the radicals got an opportunity to influence indian policies through james mill, one of the leading radical philosophers of england, who came to occupy in 1817 the very important position of chief examiner in the office of the court of directors, and william bentinck, who was a radical and who became the governorgeneral of india in 1829. also some of the officials who came to india in the 1820s and after were deeply influenced by the radical outlook.
moreover, the reforming whigs were in power in england after 1830. it must, however, be emphasised at this stage that such honest and philanthropic englishmen were few and that their influence was never decisive so far as the british administration of india was concerned.
the ruling elements in britishindian administration continued to be imperialistic and exploitative.
they would accept new ideas and adopt reformist measures only if, and to the extent that, they did not come into conflict wdth commercial interests and profit motives.
modernisation of india had to occur within the broad limits imposed by the needs of easier and more thoroughgoing exploitation of its resources.
thus modernisation of india was accepted by many english officials, businessmen, and statesmen because it was expected to make indians belter customers of british goods and reconcile them to the alien rule.
in fact many of the radicals themselves no longer remained true to their own beliefs when they discussed indian policy.
instead of working for a democratic government, as they did in britain, they demanded a more authoritarian regime, described by them as paternalistic.
in this respect they were at one with the conservatives who too were ardent champions of u paternalism which would treat the indian people as children and keep them out of the administration.
the basic dilemma before the british administrators in india was that while british interests in india could not be served without some modernisation, full modernisation would generate forces administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 115 which would go against their interests and would in the long run endanger british supremacy in the country.
they had, therefore, to follow a delicately balanced policy of partial modernisation, that is, a policy of introducing modernisation in some respects and blocking and preventing it in other respccts.
the policy of modernising indian society and culture was also encouraged by the christian missionaries and religiousminded persons such as william wilberforce and charles grant, the chairman of the court of directors of the east india company, who wanted to spread christianity in india.
they too adopted a critical attitude towards indian society but on religious grounds.
they passionately believed that christianity alone was the true religion and that all other religions were false those who,,believed in such religions were to them heathens, pagans and even semibarbarians.
they supported a programme of westernisation in the hope that it would eventually lead to the countrys conversion to christianity.
they thought that the light of western knowledge would destroy peoples faith in tbeir own religions and lead them to welcome and embrace christianity, they therefore opened modem schools, colleges, and hospitals in the country.
the missionaries were, however, often most unwilling allies of the rationalist radicals whose scientific approach undermined not only hindu or muslim mythology but christian mythology as well.
as prof. h.h.
dodwell has pointed out taught to question the validity of their own gods, they the westernised indians questioned also the validity of the bible and the truth of its narrative.
the missionaries also supported the paternalistic imperialistic policies since they looked upon law and order and british supremacy as essential for their work of religious propaganda.
they also sought the support of british merchants and manufacturers by holding out the hope that christian converts would be better customers of their goods.
the radicals were given strong support by raja rammohun roy and other likeminded indians, who were conscious of the low state to which their country and society had sunk, who were sick of caste prejudices and other social evils, and who believed that the salvation of india lay in science and humanism.
we will discuss the outlook and activities of these indians at length in the next chapter.
other reasons why the government of india followed a policy of can tious and gradual innovation and not of all out modernisation were continuous prevalence of the conservative outlook among the british officials in india and the belief that interference with, their religious beliefs and social customs might produce a revolutionary reaction among the 116 modern india indian people.
even the most ardent radicals paid heed to this warning for, along with the other members of the british governing classes, they too desired most of all the safety and perpetuation of british rule in india.
every other consideration was of secondary importance.
as a matter of fact, the policy of modernisation was gradually abandoned after 1b58 as indians proved apt pupils, shifted rapidly towards modernisation of their society and assertion of their culture, and demanded to be ruled in accordance with the modem principles of liberty, equality and nationality.
hnmanitariam measures the official british efforts at reforming indian society of its abuses were on the whole very meagre and, therefore, bore little fruit.
their biggest achievement was the outlawing of the practice of sati in 1829 when william bentinck m a i t a crime to associate in any way with the burning of a widow on her husbands funeral pyre.
earlier the british rulers had been apathetic and afraid of arousing the anger of the orthodox indians.
it was only after rammohun roy and other enlightened indians and the missionaries agitated persistently for the abolition of this monstrous custom that the government agreed to take this humanitarian step.
many indian rulers in the past, including akbar and aurangzeb, the peshwas, and jai singh of jaipur, had made unsuccessful attempts to suppress this evil practice.
in any case, bentinck deserves praise for having acted resolutely in outlawing a practice which had taken a toll of 800 lives in bengal alone between 1815 and 1818 and for refusing to bow before the opposition of the orthodox supporters of the practice of sati, female infanticide or the practice of killing female children at the time of their birth had prevailed among some of the rajput clans and other castes because of paucity of youngmen who died in large numbers in warfare and because of the difficulties of earning a livelihood in unfertile areas, and in parts of western and central india because of the prevalence of the evil custom of dowry in a virulent form.
regulations prohibiting infanticide had been passed in 1795 and 1802, but they were sternly enforced only by bentinck and hardinge.
hardinge also suppressed the practice of making human sacrifices that had prevailed among the primitive tribe of gonds.
in 1856 the government of india passed an act enabling hindu widows to remarry.
the government acted after pandit ishwar chandra vidyasagar and other reformers had carried on a prolonged agitation in favour of the measure.
the immediate effects of this act were negligible.
all these official reforms touched no more than the fringes of the indian social system and did not affect the life of the vast majority of the people.
it was perhaps not possible for a foreign government to do more.
spread of modem edaca hoa the british were more successful in helping to revolutionise the intellectual life of india through the introduction of modern education.
of course the spread of modem education was not solely the work of the government r the christian missionaries and a large number of enlightened indians also played an important administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 117 part.
for the first 60 years of its dominion in india the east india company a trading, profitmaking concerntook little interest in the education of its subjects.
there were, however, two very minor exceptions to thi policy.
in 1781, warren hastings set up the calcutta madrasah for the study and teaching of muslim law and related subjects and, in 1791, jonathan duncan started a sanskrit college at varanasi, where he was the resident, for the study of hindu law and philosophy.
both these institutions were designed to provide a regular supply of qualified indians to help the administration of law in the courts of the company.
missionaries and their supporters and many humanitarians soon began to exert pressure on the company to encourage and promote modern secular westernised education in india, while the humanitarians, including many indians, believed hat modern knowledge would be the best temedy for the social, economic, and political ills of the country, the missionaries believed that modern education would destroy the faith of the people in their own religions and lead them to adopt christianity.
a humble beginning was made in 1813 when the charter act iacurporated the principle of encouraging learned indians and promoting the knowledge or modern sciences in the country.
the act directed the company to spend the sum of one lakh of rupees for the purpose.
but even this petty amount was not made available by the company authorities till 1823. for years a great controversy raged in the country on the question of the direction that this expenditure should take.
while one section of opinion wanted it to be spent exclusively for the promotion of modern western studies, others desired that, while western sciences and literature should be taught to prepare students to take up jobs, emphasis should be placcd on the expansion of traditional indian learning.
even among those who wanted to spread western learning differences arose on the question of medium of instruction to be adopted in modern schools and colleges.
some recommended the use of indian languages, called vernaculars at the time, for the purpose, while others advocated the vise df english.
unfortunately, there was a great deal of confusion on this question.
many people failed to distinguish between english as a medium and english as a subject for study and between indian languages as a medium and traditional indian learning as the main object of study, the two controversies were settled in 1835 when the government of india decided to devote the limited resources it was willing to spare to the teaching of western sciences and literature through the medium of english language alone.
lord macaulay, who was the law member of the governorgenerals council, argued in a famous minute that indian languages were not sufficiently developed to serve the purpose, and that oriental learning was completely inferior to european learning.
it is to be noted that, though macaulays views betrayed prejudice against and ignorance of indias past achievements in the realms of science and thdught, he was on solid ground when he held european knowledge in the fields of physical and social sciences to be superior to the existing indian knowledge which though advanced at one time had stagnated too long and lost touch with reality.
that is why the most advanced indians of the time led by raja rammohun roy fervently advocated the study of western knowledge, which was seen by them as the key to the treasures of scientific and democratic thought of the modern west.
they also realised that traditional education had bred 118 modern india superstition, fear, and authoritarianism.
in other words, they realised that the salvation of the country lay in going forward and not in looking backwards.
in fact, no prominent indian of the 19th and 20th centuries deviated from this approach.
moreover, throughout the period of modern history the pressure exerted by indians anxious to imbibe western knowledge played an important part in persuading the government to expand its educational activities on modern lines.
the government of india acted quickly, particularly in bengal, on the decision of 1835 and made english the medium of instruction in its schools and colleges.
it opened a few english schools and colleges instead of a large number of elementary schools.
this policy was later sharply criticised for neglecting the education of the masses.
in fact, the emphasis on the opening of institutes of modern and higher education was not wrong.
if for nothing else, a large number of schools and colleges were needed to educate and train teachers for elementary schools.
but along with the spread of higher education, the education of the masses should have been taken in hand this the government would not do as it was not willing to spend more than an insignificant sum on education.
to make up for the paucity of expenditure on education, the officials had recourse to the socalled downward filtration theory since the allocated funds could educate only a handful of indians, it was decided to spend them in educating a few persons from the upper and middle classes who were expected to assume the task o educating the masses and spreading modem ideas among them.
education and modem ideas were thus supposed to filter or radicate downwards from the upper classes.
this policy continued until the very end of british rule, even though it was officially abandoned in 1854. it may also be pointed out here that even though education did not percolate downwards, modern ideas did to a administrative organisation and social and cultural policy i2l large extent, though not in the form desired by the rulers.
through political parties, the press, pamphlets, and public platform, though not through schools and textbooks, the educated indians, or the intellectuals, spread ideas of democracy, nationalism, antiimperialism and social and economic equality and justice among the rural and urban masses.
the secretary of states educational dispatch of 1854 was another important step in the development of education in india.
the dispatch asked the government of india to assume responsibility for the education of the masses.
it thus repudiated the downward filtration theory, at least on paper.
in practice, the government did little to spread education and spent very little on it.
as a result of the directions given by the dispatch, departments of education were instituted in all provinces and affiliating universities were set up in 1857 at calcutta, bombay and madras.
bankim chandra chatterjee, the famous bengali novelist, became in 1858 one of the first two graduates of calcutta university.
for all the loud claims that it made, the government of india under the company and later under the crown did not really take serious interest in spreading western learning or any other learning in india.
even the limited effort that was made was the result of factors which had little to do with philanthropic motives.
of some importance in this respect was the agitation in favour of modern education by progressive indians, foreign christian missionaries, and humanitarian officials and other englishmen.
but the most important reason was the governments anxiety to economise in the cost of administration by getting a cheap supply of educated indians to man the large and increasing number of subordinate posts in administration and british business concerns.
it was manifestly too costly and perhaps not even possible to import enough englishmen for the purpose.
this emphasis on a cheap supply of clerks explains why the schools and colleges had to impart modern education, which lilted its recipients for their jobs in the westernised administiation of the company, and why these institutions had to emphasise english which was the language of the masters as well as the language of the administration.
another motive behind the educational policy of the british sprang from the belief that educated indians would help expand the market fot british manufactures in india.
lastly, western education was expected to reconcile the people of india to british rub particularly as it glorified the british conquerors of india and their administration.
macaulay, for example, laid down we must, p rosent do our best to form a class who may be interpreters between us and the millions whom we govern a class of persons, indians in blood and colour, but english in taste, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect.
the british thus wanted to use modern education to strengthen the foundation of their political authority in the country.
the traditional indian system of education gradually withered away for lack of official support and even more because of the official announcement in 1844 that applicants for government employment should possess 120 modern india knowledge of english this declaration made englishmedium schools very popular and compelled more and more students to abandon the traditional schools, a major weakness of the educational system was the neglect of mass education with the result that mass literacy in india was hardly better in 1921 than in 1821. as many as 94 per cent of indians were illiterate in 1911 and 92 per cent in 1921. the emphasis on english as the medium of instruction in place of the indian languages also prevented th spread of education to the masses.
it further tended to create a wide gulf between educated persons and the masses.
moreover, the costly nature of higher education tended to make it a monopoly of the richer classes and the citydwellers, a major lacuna in the early educational policy was the almost total neglect of the education of girls for which no funds were allotted.
this was partly due to the governments anxiety not to hurt the susceptibilities of orthodox indians.
even more it was because female education lacked immediate usefulness in the eyes of the foreign officials since women could not be employed as clerks in the government.
the result was that as late as 1921 only 2 out of 100 indian women were able to read and write and in 1919 only 490 girls were studying in the four top forms of high schools in bengal presidency.
the companys administration also neglected scientific and technical education by 1857 there were only three medircl colleges in the country at calcutta, bombay and madras.
there was only one good engineering college at roorkee to impart higher technical education and even this was open only to europeans and eurasians.
at the root of many of these weaknesses lay the problem of finance.
the government was never willing to spend more than a scanty sum on education.
as late as 1886, it devoted only about one crore of rupees to education out of its total net revenue of nearly 47 crores.
we must, however, remember that in spite of all the many weaknesses of the official educational policy, the limited spread of modern education led to the propagation of modern ideas in india and thus helped in its modernisation.
e x e r c i s e s 1. discuss the basic features of the administrative organisation of india under the east india company, with special reference to the underlying aims or the administration, the civil service, the army, the police, and the judicial administration.
2. what were the main characteristics of modern thought which influenced british policies in india examine the nature and extent of this influence.
administrative organisation and social and cultural policy 121 3. examine critically the evolution of modern education and educational policies in the 19th and 20th centuries, with special reference to the factors that jed to the introduction of modern education 4. write short notes on a indian civil service, b the rule of law, c equality before law, d the policy of partial modernisation, e the abolition of the practice of safi, f the role of english as medium of instruction, g education of girls, h technical education.
ch ap t e r v ii social and cultural awakening in the first half of the 19th century mpact of modern western culture soon gave birth to a new awakening in india.
western conquest exposed the weakness and decay of indian society.
thoughtful indians began to look for the defects of their society and for ways and means of removing them.
while large number of indians refused to come to terms with the west and still put their faith in traditional indian ideas and institutions, others gradually came to hold that modern western thought provided the key to the regeneration of their society.
they were impressed in particular by modem science and the doctrines of reason and humanism.
moreover, the new social groupsthe capitalist class, the working class, the modern intelligentsiademanded modernisation since their own interests demanded it.
the central figure in this awakening was rammohun roy, who is rightly regarded as the first great leader of modern india.
rammohun roy was moved by deep love for his people and country and worked hard all his life for their social, religious, intellectual, and political regeneration.
he was pained by the stagnation and corruption of contemporary indian society which was at that time dominated by caste and convention.
popular religion was full of superstitions and was exploited by ignorant and corrupt priests.
the upper classes weie seljish and often sactificcd social interest to their own nairow interests.
rammohun roy possessed great love and respect lor the traditional philosophic systems of the east but, at the same time, he believed that western culture alone would help regenerate indian society.
in particular, he wanted ins countrymen to accept the rational and scientific approach and the principle of human djgnjty and social equality of all men and women.
he also i 122 modern india wanted the introduction of modern capitalism and mdusity in the country.
rammohun roy represented a synthesis of the thought of east and west, he was a learned scholar who knew over a dozen languages including sanskrit, persian, arabic, english, french, latin, greek and hebrew.
as a youngman he had studied sanskrit literature and hindu philosophy al varanasi and he koran and persian and arabic literature at fatna.
he was also we 11 acquainted with jainism and other religious movements and sects of india.
later he made an intensive study of western thought and culture.
to study the bible in the original he learnt greek and hebrew.
in 1809 he wrote in persian his famous work gift to monotheists in which he put forward weighty arguments against belief in many gods and for the worsnip of a single god.
he settled jn calcutta in 1814 and soon attracted a band of youngmen with whose cooperation he started the atmiya sabha.
from now on he carried on a persistent struggle against the religious and social evils which were widely prevalent among the hindus in bengal.
in particular he vigorously opposed worship of idols, rigidity of caste, and prevalence of meaningless religious rituals.
he condemned the priestly class for encouraging and inculcating these practices.
he held that all the principal ancient texts of the hindus preached monotheism or worship of one god.
he published the bengali translation of the vedas and of five of the principal upanishads to prove his point.
he also wrote a series of tracts and pamphlets in defence of monotheism.
while citing ancient authority for his philosophical views, rammohun roy relied ultimately on the power of human reason which was in his view the final touchstone of the truth of any doctrine, eastern or western.
he believed thaf the philosophy of vedanta was based on this principle of reason.
in any case, one should not hesitate to depart from holy books, scriptures, and inheiited traditions if human reason so dictates and if such traditions are proving harmful to the society, but rammohun roy did not confine his application of the rational approach to indian religions and traditions, alone.
in this he disappointed his many missionary friends who liad hoprf that his rational critique of hinduism .
would lead him to embrace christianity.
rammohun roy insisted on applying rationalism to christianity too, particularly to the elements of blind faith in it.. in 1820, he published his precepts of jesus in which he tried to separate the moral and philosophic message of the new testament, which he praised, from its miracle stories.
he wanted the high moral message of christ to be incorporated iu hinduism.
this earned for him the hostility of the missionaries, thus, as far as rammohun was concerned thsrg was to be no blind reliance on1 indias own past or blind aping of the west.
on the other hand, he put forward the idea that new india, guided by reason, should acquire and treasure all that was best in the east and the west.
thus he wanted india to learn from the west but this learning was to bean intellectual and creative process through which indian culture and thtiught were to be renovated it was not to be an imposition of western culture cn india he, therefore stood for the reform of hinduism and opposed its supcrcession by christianity.
he vigorously defended hindu religion social and cultural awakening 123 and philosophy from the ignorant attacks of the missionaries.
at the same time, he adopted an extremely friendly attitude towards other religions.
he believed that basically all religions preach a common message and that their followers are all brothers under the skin.
all his life rammohun roy paid heavily for his daring religious outlook.
the orthodox condemned him for criticising idolatry and for his philosophic admiration of christianity and islam.
they organised a social boycott against him in which even his mother joined.
he was branded a heretic and an outcaste.
in 1829 he founded a new religious society, the brahma sabha, later known as the brahmo samaj, whose purpose was to purify hinduism and to preach theism or the worship of one god, the new society was to be based on the twin pillars of reason and the vedas and upanishads.
it was also to incorporate the teachings of other religions.
the brahmo samaj laid emphasis on human dignity, opposed idolatry, and criticised such social evils as the practice of sati.
rammohun roy was a great thinker.
he was also a man of action.
there was hardly any aspect of nationbuilding which he left untouched.
in fact, just as he began the reform of hindu religion from within, he also laid the foundations of the reform of indian society.
the best example of his hfelong crusade against social evils was the historic agitation he organised against the inhuman custom of women becoming sati.
beginning in 1818 he set out to rouse public opinion on the question.
on the one hand he showed by citing the authority of the oldest sacred books that the hindu religion at its best was opposed to the practice on the other, he appealed to the reason and humanity and compassion of the people.
he visited the burning ghats at calcutta to try to pursuade the relatives of widows to give up their plan of selfimmolation.
he organised groups of likeminded people to keep a strict check on such performances and to prevent any attempt to force the widows to become sati.
when the orthodox hindus petitioned to parliament to withhold its approval of bentincks action of banning the rite of salt, he organised a counterpetition of enlightened hindus in favour of bentincks action he was a stout champion of womens rights.
he condemned the subjugation of women and opposed the prevailing idea that women were inferior to men in intellect or in a moral sense he attacked polygamy and the degraded state to which widows were often reduced.
to raise the status of women he demanded that they be given the right of inheritance and property.
rammohun roy was one of the earliest propagators of modern education which he looked upon as a major,instrument for the spread of modern ideas in the country.
, in 1817, david hare, who had come out to india in 1800 as a watchmaker but who spent his entire life in the promotion of modern education in the country, founded the famous hindu college.
rammohun roy gave most enthusiastic assistance to hare in this and his other educational projects.
in addition, he maintained at his own cost an english school in calcutta from 1817 in which, among other subjects, mechanics and the philosophy of voltaire were taught.
in 1825 he established a vedanta college in which courses both in indian learning and in western social and physical sciences were offered.
124 modern india rammohun roy was equally keen on making bengali the vehicle of intellectual intercourse in bengal.
he compiled a bengali grammar.
through his translations, pamphlets and journals he helped evolvfc a modem and elegant prose style for that language.
rammohun represented the first glimmerings of the rise of national consciousness in india.
the vision of an independent and resurgent india guided his thoughts and actions.
he believed that by trying to weed out corrupt elements from indian religions and society and by preaching the vedantic message of worship of one god he was laying the foundations for the unity of indian society which was divided into divergent groups.
in particular he opposed the rigidities of the caste system which, he declared, has been the source of wajit of unity among us.
he believed that the caste system was doubly evil it created inequality and it divided people and deprived them of patriotic feeling.
thus, according to him, one of the aims of religious reform was political uplift.
rammohun roy was a pioneer of indian journalism.
he brought out journals in bengali, persian, hindi and english to spread scientific, literary, and political knowledge among the people, to educate public opinion on topics of current interest, and to represent popular demands and grievances before the government.
he was also the initiator of public agitation on political questions in the country.
he condemned the oppressive practices of the bengal zamindars which had reduced the peasants to a miserable condition.
he demanded that the maximum rents paid by the actual cultivators of land should be permanently fixed so that they too would enjoy the benefits of the permanent settlement of 1793. he also protested against the attempts to impose taxes on taxfree lands.
he demanded the abolition of tho companys trading rights and the removal of heavy export duties on indian goods.
he also raised the demands for the indianisation of the superior services, separation of the executive and the judiciary trial by jury, and judicial equality between indians and europeans.
rammohun was a firm believer in internationalism and in free cooperation between nations.
the poet rabindranath tagore has rightly remarked rammohun was the only person in his time, in the whole world of man, to realise completely the significance of the modern age.
he knew that the ideal of human civilisation does not lie in the isolation of independence, but in the brotherhood of interdependence of individuals as well as nations in all spheres of thought and activity.
rammohun roy took a keen interest in international events and everywhere he supported the cause of liberty, democracy, and nationalism and opposed injustice, oppression, and tyranny in eveiy form, the news of the failure of the revolution in naples in 1821 made him so sad that he cancelled all his social engagements.
on the other hand, he celebrated the success of the revolution in spanish america m 1823 by giving a public dinner.
he condemned the miserable condition of ireland under the oppressive regime of absentee landlordism.
he publicly declared that he would emigrate from the british empire if parliament failed to pass the reform bill.
rammohun was fearless as a lion.
he did not hesitate to support a just cause.
social and cultural awakening 125 all his life he fought against social injustice and inequality even at great personal loss and hardship.
in his life of service to society he often clashed with his family, with rich zamindars and powerful missionaries, and with high officials and foreign authorities.
yet he never showed fear nor shrank from his chosen course.
rammohun roy was the brightest star in the indian sky during the first half of the 19th century, but he was not a lone star.
he had many distinguished associates, followers, and successors.
in the field of education he was greatly helped by the dutch watchmaker david hare and the scottish missionaiy alexander duff.
dwarkanath tagore was the foremost of his indian associates.
his other prominent followers were prasanna kumar tagore, chandrashekhar deb, and tarachand chakra varti, the first secretary of the brahma sabha.
a radical trend arose among the bengali intellectuals during the late 1820s and the 1830s.
this trend was more modern than even rammohun roys and is known as the young bengal movement.
its leader and inspirer was the young angloindian henry vivian derozio, who was born jn 1809 and who taught at hindu college from 1826 to 183l derozio possessed a dazzling intellect and followed hie most radical views of the time drawing his inspiiatlon from the great french revolution.
he was a brilliant teacher who, in spite of his youth, attached to himself a, host of bright and adoring students.
he inspired these students to think rationally and freely, to question all authority, to love liberty, equality and freedom, and to worship truth.
derozio and his famous followers, known as the derozians and young bengal, were fiery patriots.
derozio was perhaps the first nationalist poet of modern india.
for example, he wroie in 1827 my country i in the days of glory past a beauteous halo circled round,thy brow.
and worshipped as a deity thou wast, where is that glory, where that reverence now thy eagle pinion is chained down at last, and grovelling in the lowly dust art thou, thy minstrel hath no wreath to weave for thee save the sad story of thy misery i and one of his pupils, kashi prasad ghosh, wrote land of the gods and lofty name land of the fair and beautys spell land of the bards of mighty fame, my native land for eer farewell 1830 but woe me i never shall live to behold, that day of thy triumph, when firmly and bold, thou shalt mount on the wings of an eagle on high.
to the region of knowledge and blest liberty, 1861. derozio was removed from the hindu college in 1831 because of his radicalism and died of cholera soon afler at the young age of 22. the derozians attacked old and decadent customs, rites, and traditions.
they were passionate advocates of womens rights and demanded education for them.
they did not, however, succeed in creating a movement because social conditions were not yet ripe for their ideas to flourish.
they did not take up the peasants cause and there was no other glass or group in indian society at the time which could support their advanced ideas.
moreover, they forgot to maintain their links with the people.
in 126 modern india fact, their radicalism was bookish they failed to come to grips with the indian reality.
even so, the derozians carried forward rammohuns tradition of educating the people in social, economic, and political questions through newspapers, pamphlets, and public associations.
they carried on public agitation on public questions such as the revision of the companys charter, the freedom of the press, better treatment for indian labour in british colonies abroad, trial by jury, protection of the ryots from oppressive zamindars, and employment of indians in the higher grades of government services.
surendranath banerjea, the famous leader of the nationalist movement, described the derozians as the pioneers of the modern civilization of bengal, the conscript fathers of our race whose virtues will excite veneration and whose failings will be treated with gentlest consideration.
the brahmo samaj had in the meanwhile continued to exist but without much life till debendranath.
tagore, father of rabindranath tagore, revitalised it.
debendranath was a product of the best in the traditional indian learning and the new thought of the west.
in 1839 he founded the tatvabodhini sabha to propagate rammohun roys ideas.
in time it came to include most of the prominent followers of rammohun and derozio and other independent thinkers like ishwar chandra vidyasagar and akshay kumar dutt.
the tatvabodhini sabha and its organ the tatvabodhini patrika promoted a systematic study of indias past in the bengali language.
it also helped spread a rational outlook among the intellectuals of bengal.
in 1843 debendranath tagore reorganised the brahmo samaj and put new life into it.
the samaj actively supported the movement for widow remarriage, abolition of polygamy, womens education, improvement of the ryots condition, and temperance.
the next towering personality to appear on the indian scene was pandit ishwar chandra vidyasagar, the great scholar and reformer.
vidyasagar dedicated his entire life to the cause of social reform born in 1820 in a very poor family, he struggled through hardship to educate himself and in the end rose m 1851 to the position of the principalship of the sanskrit college.
though he was a great sanskrit scholar, his mind was open to the best in western thought, and he came to represent a happy blend of indian and western culture.
his greatness lay above all in his sterling character and shining intellect.
possessed of immense courage and a fearless mind he practised what he believed.
there was no lag between his beliefs and his action, between his thought and his practice.
he was simple in dress and habits and direct in his manner.
he was a great humanist who possessed immense sympathy for the poor, the unfortunate and the oppressed.
in bengal, innumerable stories regarding his high character, moral qualities, and deep humanism are related till this day.
he resigned from government service for he would not tolerate undue official interference.
his generosity to the poor was fabulous.
he seldom possessed a warm coat for he invariably gave it to the first naked beggar he met on the street.
vidyasagars contribution to the making of modern india is many sided.
he evolved a new technique of teaching sanskrit.
he wrote a bengali primer which is social and cultural awakening 127 used till this day.
by his writings he helped in the evolution of a modern prose style in bengali.
he opened the gates of the sanskrit college to nonbrahmin students for he was opposed to the monopoly of sanskrit studies that the priestly caste was enjoying at the time.
to free sanskrit studies from the harmful effects of selfimposed isolation, he introduced the study, of western thought in the sanskrit college.
he also helped found a college which is now named after him.
above all vidyasagar is remembered gratefully by his countrymen for hir rmt.ribution to the uplift of indias downtrodden womanhood.
here he proved a worthy successor to rammohan roy.
he waged a long struggle in favoui of widow remarriage.
his humanism was aroused to the full by the sufferings of the hindu widows.
to improve their lot he gavehis all and virtually ruined himself.
he raised his powerful voice, backed by the weight of immense traditional learning, in favour of widow remarriage in 1855. soon a powerful movement in favour of widow remarriages was started which continues till this day.
later in the year 1855, a large number of petitions from bengal, madras, bombay, nagpur and other citics of india were presented to the government asking it to pass an act legalising the remarriage of widows.
this agitation was successful and such a law was enacted.
the first lawful hindu widow remarriage among the upper castes in our country was celebrated in calcutta on 7 december 1856 under the inspiration and supervision of vidyasagar.
widows of many other castcs in different parts of the country already enjoyed this right under customary law.
an observer has described the ceremony in the following words 1 shall never forget the day.
when pandit vidyasagar came with his friend, the bridegroom, at the head of a large procession, the crowd of spectators was so great that there was not an inch of moving space, and many fell into the big drains which were to be seen by the sides of calcutta streets in those days.
after the ceremony, it became the subject of discussion everywhere in the bazars and the shops, in the streets, in the public squares, in students lodginghouses, in gentle mens drawingrooms, in .offices and in distant village homes, where even vomen earnestly discussed it among themselves.
the weavers of santipore issued a peculiar kind of womans sari which contained woven along its borders the first line of a newly composed song which went on to say may vidyasagar live long.
for his advocacy of widow remarriage, vidyasagar had to face the bitter enmity of the orthodox hindus, at times even his life was threatened.
but he fearlessly pursued his chosen course.
through his efforts, which included the grant of monetary help to needy couples, twenty five widow remarriages were performed between 1855 and 1860. in 1850, vidyasagar protested against cliiidmarriage.
all his life he campaigned against polygamy.
he was also deeply interested in the education of women.
as a government inspector of schools, he organised thirty five girls schools, many of which he ran at hia own expense.
as secretary to the bethune school, he was one of the pioneers of higher education for women.
the bethune school, founded in calcutta in 1849, was the first fruit of the powerful movement for womens education that arose in the 184gs and 1850s.
while the education of women was not unknown in india, a great deal of prejudice against it existed.
some even believed that educated women would lose their husbands the first steps in giving a modern education to girls were taken by the 128 modern india missionaries in 1821, but these efforts were marred by the emphasis on christian religious education.
the bethune school had great difficulty in securing students.
the young students were shouted at and abused and sometimes even their parents were subjected to social boycott.
many believed that girls who had received western education would make slaves of their husbands.
the impact of western ideas was felt much earlier in bengal than in western india which was brought under effective british control as late as isis.
in 1849 the paramahansa mandali was founded in maharashtra.
its founders believed in one god and were primarily interested in breaking caste rules.
at its meetings, members took food cooked by low caste people.
in 1848, several educated youngmen formed the students literary and scientific society, which had two branches, the gujarati and the marathi dnyan prasarak mandlis.
the society organised lectures on popular science and social questions.
one of the aims of the society was to start schools for the education of women.
in 1851, jotiba phule and his wife started a girls school at poona and soon many other schools came up.
among active promoters of these schools were jagan nath shankar seth and bhau daji.
phule was also a pioneer of the widow remarriage movement ia maharashtra.
vjshnu shastri pundit founded the widow remarriage association in the 1850s.
another prominent worker in this field was karsondas mulji who started the satya prakash in gujarati in 1852 to advocate widow remarriage.
an outstanding champion of new learning and social reform in maharashtra was gopal hari deshmukh, who became famous by the pen name of lokahilawadi.
he advocated the reorganization of indian society on rational principles and modern humanistic and secular values.
jotiba phule, bom in a low caste mali family, was also acutely aware of the socially degraded position of nonbrahmins and untouchables in maharashtra.
ah his life he carried on a campaign against upper caste domination and brahmanical supremacy.
dadabhai naoroji was another leading social reformer of bombay.
he was one of the founders of an association to reform the zoroasttian religion and the parsi law association which agitated for the grant of a legal status to women and for uniform laws of inheritance and marriage for the parsis.
exercises 1. bring out the contribution of raja rammohun roy to the social and cultural awakening in the 19th century.
2. in what ways did ishwar chandra vidyasagar contribute to the making of modern india 3. write short notes on a henry vivian derozio b young bengal, c debendranath tagore d the bethune school, e religious reform in wratmti tnhia i c h a p t e r viii the revolt of 1857 mighty popular revolt broke out in northern and central india in 1857 and nearly swept away british rule.
it began with a mutiny of the sepoys, or the indian soldiers of the companys army, but soon engulfed wide regions and people.
millions of peasants, artisans, and soldiers fought heroically for over a year and by their courage and sacrifice wrote a glorious chapter in the history of the indian people.
the revolt of 1857 was much more than a mere pfoduct of sepoy discontent.
it was in reality a product of the accumulated grievances of the people against the companys administration and of their dislike for the foreign regime.
for over a century, as the british had been conquering the country bit by bit, popular discontent and hatred against foreign rule had been gaining strength among the different sections of indian society.
it was this discontent that burst forth into a mighty popular revolt.
perhaps the most important cause of the popular discontent was the economic exploitation of the country by the british and the complete destruction of its traditional economic fabric both impoverished the vast mass of peasants, artisans, and handicraftsmen as also a large number of traditional zamindars and chiefs.
we have traced the disastrous economic impact of early british rule in another chapter.
other general causes were the british land and land revenue policies and the systems of law and administration.
in particular, a large number of peasant proprietors lost their lands to traders and moneylenders and found themselves hopelessly involved in debt.
in addition, common people were hard hit by the prevalence of corruption at tbe lo wer levels of administration.
the police, petty officials, and lower lawcourts were notoriously corrupt, william edwards, a british official, wrote in 1859 while discussing the causes of the revolt that the police were a scourge to the people and that their oppressions and exactions form one of the chief grounds of dissatisfaction with our government.
the petty officials lost no opportunity of enriching themselves at the cost of the ryots and the zamindars.
the complex judicial system enabled the rich to oppress the poor.
thus .
a 134 modern india the growing poverty of the people made them desperate and led them to join a general revolt in the hope of improving their lot.
the middle and upper classes of indian society, particularly in the north, were hard hit by their exclusion from the wellpaid higher posts in the administration.
the gradual disappearance of indian states deprived those indians, who were employed in them in high administrative and judicial posts, of any visible means of livelihood.
british supremacy also led to the ruin of persons who made a living by following cultural pursuits.
the indian rulers had been patrons of arts and utera lure and had supported religious preachers and divines.
displacement of these rulers by the east india company meant the sudden withdrawal of this patronage and the impoverishment of those who had depended upon it.
religious preachers, pandits and maulavls, who felt that their entire future was threatened, were to play an important role in spreading hatred against the foreign rule.
another basic cause of the unpopularity of british rule was its very foreign ness.
the british remained perpetual foreigners in the country.
for one, there was no social link or communication between them and the indians.
unlike foreign conquerors before them, they did not mix socially even with the uppsr classes of indians instead, they had a feeling of racial superiority and treated indians with contempt and arrogance.
as sayyid ahmad khan wrote later even natives of the highest lank never came into the presence of officials but with an inward fear and trembling.
most of all, the british, did not come to settle in india and to make it their home.
their main aim was to enrich themselves and then go back to britain along with their wealth.
the people of india were aware of this basically foreign character of the new rulers.
they refused to recognise the british as their benefactors and looked with suspicion upon every act of theirs.
they had thus a vague sort of anti british feeling which had found expression even earlier than the revolt in numerous popular uprisings against the british.
munshi mohanlal of delhi, who remained loyal to the british during the revolt, wrote later that even those who had grown, rich under british rule showed hidden delight at british reverses.
another loyalist, muinuddin hasan khan, pointed out that the people looked upon the british as foreign trespassers.
the period of the growth of discontent among the people coincided with certain events which shattered the general belief in the invincibility of british arms and encouraged the people to believe that the days of the british regime were numbered.
the british army suffered major reverses in the first afghan war 183842 and the punjab wars 184549, and the crimean war 185456. in 185556 the santhal tribesmen of bihat and bengal rose up armed with axes and bows and arrows and revealed the potentialities of a popular uprising by temporarily sweeping away british rule from their area.
though the british ultimately won these wars and suppressed the santhal uprising, the disasters they suffered in major baftles revealed that the british array could be defeated by determined fighting, even by an asian army.
in fret, the indians made here a serious error of political judgment by underestimating british strength.
this error was to cost the rebels of 1857 dear.
at the same time the historical significance of tub revolt op 1857 135 this factor should not be missed.
people do not revolt simply because they have the desire to overthrow their rulers they must in addition possess the confidence that they can do so successfully.
the annexation of avadh by lord dalhousie in 1856 was widely resented in india in general and in avadh in particular.
more specifically, it created an atoosphere of rebellion in avadh and in the companys army.
dalhousiea action angered the companys sepoys, most of whom came from avadh.
lacking an all india feeling, these sepoys had helped the british conquer the rest of idia.
but they did possess regional and local patriotism and did not like that their home iands should come under the foreigners sway.
moreover, the annexation of avadh adversely affected the sepoys purse.
he had to pay higher taxes on the land his family held ir avadh.
the excuse dalhousie had advanced fqr annexing avadh was that he wanted to free the people from the nawabs and taluqdars oppression, but, in practice, the people got no relief.
indeed, the common man had now to pay higher land revenue and additional taxes on articles of food, houses, ferries, opium, and justice.
moreover, as in the rest of india, peasants and old zamindars began to lose their land to new zamindars and moneylenders.
the dissolution of the nawabs administration and army threw out of jobs thousands of nobles, gentlemen, and officials together with their retainers and officers and soldiers and created unem ployment in almost every peasants home.
similarly, merchants, shopkeepers, and handicraftsmen who had catered to the avadh court and nobles lost their livelihood.
the british provided no alterative employment to these people.
moreover, the british confiscated the estates of a majority of the taluqdars or zamindars.
these dispossessed taluqdars became the most dangerous opponents of british rule.
the annexation of avadh, along with the other annexations of dalhousie, created panic among rulers of the native states.
they now discovered that their most grovelling loyalty to the british had failed to .
satisfy the british greed for territory.
what is of even greater importance, , the political prestige of the british suffered a great deal because of tie manner in which they had repeatedly broken their written and oral pledges and treaties with the indian powers and reduced them to subbrdination while pretending and claiming to be their friends and protectors.
this policy of annexation was, for example, directly responsible for making nana sahib, the rani of jhansi, and bahadur shah their staunch enemies.
nana sahtb was the adopted son of baji rao ii, the last peshwa.
the british refused to grant nana sahib the pension they were paying to baji rao ii, who died in 1851. similarly, the british insistence on the annexation of ihansi incensed the proud rani lakshmibai who wanted her adopted son to succeed her deceased husband.
the house of the mughuls was humbled when dalhousie announced in 1849 that the successor to bahadur shah would have to abandon the historic red fort and move to a humbler residence at the qutab on the outskirts of delhi.
and, in 1856, canning announced that after bahadur shahs death the mughuls would lose the title of kings and would be 136 modern indja.
known as mere princes.
an important role in turning the people against british rule was played by their fear that it endangered their religion.
this fear was largely due to the activities of the christian missionaries who were to be seen everywherein the schools, in the hospitals, in the prisons and at the market places.
these missionaries tried to convert people and made violent and vulgar public attacks on hinduism and islam.
they openly ridiculed and denounced the long cherished customs and traditions of the people.
they were, moreover, provided police protection.
tbe actual conversions made by them appeared to the people as living proofs of the threat to their religion.
popular suspicion that the alien government supported ihe activities of the missionaries was strengthened by certain acts of the government and the actions of some of its officials.
in 1850, the government enacted a law which enabled a convert to christianity to inherit his anccstrai property.
moreover, the government maintained at its cost chaplains or christian priests in the army.
many officials, civil as well as military, considered it their religious duty to encourage missionary propaganda and to provide instruction in christianity in government schools and even in jails.
the activities of such officials filled the people with fear, and this fesr seemed to find confirmation when they read in 1857 that r.d.
mangles had told the house of commons providcnce has an trusted the extensive empire of hindustan to england, in order that tlie banner of chnst should wae it lumphaut fiom one end of india to the other.
everyone must exert all his strength in ..cntinuuvg in iho country the grand work of making india christian.
the conservative religious sentiments of many people were also aroused by some of the humanitarian measures which the government had under taken on the advice of indian reformers they believed that an alien christian government had no right to interfere in, or reform, their religion the revolt of 1857 137 and customs.
abolition of the custom of sati, legalisation of widows remarriage, and the opening of western education to girls appeared to them as examples of such undue interference.
religious sentiments were also hurt by the official policy of taxing lands belonging to temples and mosques and to their priests or the charitable institutions which had been exempted from taxation by previous indian rulers.
moreover, the many brahmin and muslim families dependent on these lands were aroused to fury, and they began to propagate that the british were trying to undermine the religions of india.
the revolt of 1857 started with the mutiny of companys sepoys.
we have therefore to examine why the sepoys, who had by their devoted service enabled the company to conquer india, suddenly became rebellious.
here the first fact to be kept in view is that the sepoys were after all a part of indian society and, therefore, felt and suffered to some extent what other indians did.
the hopes, desires, and despairs of the other sections of society were reflected in them.
if their near and dear ones suffered  from the destructive economic consequences of british rule, they ia urn felt this suffering.
they were also duly affected by the general belief that the british were interfering in their religions and were determined to convert indians to christianity.
their own experience predisposed them to such a belief.
they knew that the army was.
maintaining chaplains at state cost.
moreover, some of the british officers in their religious ardour carried on christian propaganda among the sepoys.
the sepoys also had religious or caste grievances of their own.
the indians of those days were very strict in observing caste rules, etc, the military authorities forbade the sepoys to wear caste and sectarian marks, beards, or turbans.
in 1856 an act was passed under which every new recruit undertook to serve even overseas, if required.
this hurt the sepoys sentiments as, according to the current religious beliefs of the hindus, travel across the sea was forbidden and led to loss of caste.
the sepoys also had numerous other grievances against their employers.
they were treated with contempt by their british officers.
a contempo lary english observer noted that the officers and men have not been friends hut strangers to one another.
the sepoy is esteemed an inferior creature.
he is sworn at.
he is treated roughly.
he is spoken of as a nigger.
he is addressed as a suar or pigthe younger men ... treat him as an inferior animal.
even though a sepoy was as good a soldier as his british counterpart, he was paid much lesj and lodged and fed in a far worse manner than the latter.
moreover, he had little prospect of a rise no indian could rise higher than a subedar drawing.
60 to 70 rupees a month.
in fact, the sepoys life was quite hard.
naturally, the sepoy resented this artificial1 and enforced position of inferiority.
as the british historian t,r.
holmes has put it jl though he might give signs of the military genius of a hyder, he knew that he could never attain the pay of an english subaltern and that the rank to which he might attain, after some 30 years of faithful service, would not protect him from the insolent dictation of an ensign freuh from england.
a more immediate cause of the sepoys dissatisfaction was the recent order that they would not be given the foreign service allowance bata when serving in sindh or in the punjab.
this order resulted in a big cut in the salaries of a large 138 modern india .number of them.
the annexation of avadh, the home of many sepoys, further inflamed their feelings.
the dissatisfaction of the sepoys had in fact a long history, a sepoy mutiny had broken out in bengal as early as 1764. the authorities had suppressed it by blowing away 30 sepoys from the mouths of guns.
in 1806 the sepoys at vellore mutinied but were crushed with terrible violence.
in 1824, the 47th regiment of sepoys at barrackpore refused to go to burma by the searoute.
the regiment was disbanded, its unarmed men were fired upon by artillery, and the leaders of the sepoys were hanged.
in 1844, seven battalions revolted on the question of salaries and batta.
similarly, the sepoys in afghanistan were on the verge of revolt during the afghan war.
two subedars, a muslim and a hindu, were shot dead for giving expression to the discontent in the army.
dissatisfaction was so widespread among the sepoys that fredrick halliday, lieutenant governor of bengal in 1858, was led to remark that the bengal army was more or less mutinous, always on the verge of revolt and certain to have mutinied at one time or another as soon as provocation might combine with opportunity.
thus widespread and intense dislike and even hatred of the foreign rule prevailed among large numbers of indian people and soldiers of the companys army.
this feeling was later summed up by saiyid ahmad khan in his causes of the indian mutiny as follows at length, the indians fell into the habit of thinking that all laws were passed with a view to degrade and ruin them and to deprive them and their compatriots of their religion... , at last came the time when all men looked upon the english government as slow poison, a rope of sand, a treacherous flame of fire.
they began to believe that if today they escaped from the clutches of the government, tomorrow they would fall into them or that even if they escaped the morrow, the third day would see their ruin... the people wished for a change in the government, and rcjoicedheartlly at the idea of british rule being superceded byano ther, similarly, a proclamation issued by the rebels in delhi complained firstly, in hindustan they have exacted as revenue rupees 300 where only 200 were due, and rupees 500 where but 400 were demandable, and still they ait solicitous to raise their demands, the people must therefore beruined and beggared.
secondly, they havedoubled and quadrupled and raised tenfold the chowkeodaree tax and have wished to ruin the people.
thirdly, the occupation of all respectable and learned men is gone, and million ue destitute of the necessaries of life.
when any one in search of employment determines on proceeding the revolt of 1837 139 from one zillaii to another, every soul is charged six pie aa toll on roads, and has to pay from 4 to 8 aonas for each cart.
those only who pay are permitted to travel on the public roads.
how far can we detail tbe oppression, of he tyrants gradually matters arrived pt such a pitch that the government had determined to subvert everyones religion.
the revolt of 1857 came as the culmination of popular discontent with british policies and imperialist exploitation.
but it was no sudden occurrence the discontent had been accumulating for a long time.
many shrewd british officials had taken note of it and issued stem warnings.
surer and clearer indications of the gathering storm were a series of rebellions and revolts against british authority ever since its establishment in india in 1757. hundreds of such uprisings have been recorded by historians.
perhaps the most famous of these are the kutch rebellion, the kol uprising of 1831 and the santhal uprising of 1855. the kutch rebellion, led by its chiefs, lasted in one form or another from 1816 to 1832. the kol tribesmen of chota nagpur rebelled against the british for imposing on them outsiders as moneylenders and landlords.
thousands of kols perished before british authority could be reimposed.
the causes of the santhal uprising were primarily economic and it was directed against the moneylenders and their protectors, the british authorities.
the santhals arose in their thousands and proclaimed a government of their own in the area between bhagalpur and rajmahal.
they were ultimately suppressed in 1856. the immediate cause by 185, the material for a mass upheaval was ready, only a spark was needed to set it afire.
the pent up discontent of the people needed a focus, an immediate issue, on which it could be concentrated.
the episode of the greased cartridges provided this spark for the sepoys and their mutiny provided the general populace the occasion to revolt.
the new enfield rifle had been st introduced in the army.
its cartridges had a greased paper cover whose end had to be bitten off before the cartridge was loaded into the rifle.
the grease was in some instances composed of beef and pig fat.
the sepoys, hindu as well as muslim, were enraged.
the use of the greased cartridges would endanger their religion.
many of them beheved that the government was deliberately trying to destroy their religion.
the time to rebel had come.
tbe beginning of revolt it is not yet clear whether the revolt of 1857 was spontaneous and unplanned or the result of a careful and secret organisation.
a peculiar aspect of the study of the history of the revolt of 1857 is that it has to be based almost entirely on british records, the rebels have left behind no records.
as they worked illegally, they perhaps kept no records.
moreover, they were defeated and suppressed and their version of events died with them.
lastly, for years afterwards, the british suppressed any favourable mention of the revolt, and took strong action against anyone who tried to present their side of the story.
one group of historians and writers has asserted that the revolt was the result of a widespread and wellorganised conspiracy.
they point to the circulation of 140 modern india chappattis and red lotuses, propaganda by wandering sanyasis, faqirs and madaris.
they say that many of the indian regiments were carefully linked in a secret organisation which had fixed 31 may 1857 as the day when all of them were to revolt.
it is also said that nana sahib and maulavi ahmad shah of faizabad were playing leading roles in this conspiracy.
other writers equally forcefully deny that any careful planning went into the making of the revolt.
they point out that not a scrap of paper was discovered before or after the revolt indicating an organised conspiracy, nor did a single witness come forward to make such a claim.
the truth perhaps lies somewhere between these two extreme views.
it seems likely that there was an organised conspiracy to revolt but that the organisation had not progressed sufficiently when the revolt broke out accidentally.
the revolt began at meerut, 36 miles from delhi, on 10 may 1857 and then gathering force rapidly it cut across northern india like a sword.
it soon embraced a vast area from the punjab in tha north and the narmada in the south to bihar in the east and rajputana in the west.
even before the outbreak almeerut, manga pande had become a martyr at barrackpore.
mangal pande, a young soldier, was hanged on 29 marclhi.857 for revolting singlehanded and attacking his superior officers.
this and many similar incidents were a sign that discontent and rebellion were brewing among the sepoy.
and then came the explosion at meerut on 24 april ninety men of the 3rd native cavalry refused to accept the greased cartridges.
on 9 may eighty five of them were dismissed, sentenced to 10 years imprisonment and put into fetters.
this sparked off a general mutiny among the indian soldiers stationed at meerut.
the very next day, on 10 may, they released their imprisoned comrades, killed their officers, and unfurled the banner of revolt.
as if drawn by a magnet they set off for delhi after s onset.
when the meerut soldiers appeared m delhi the next morning, the local infantry joined them, killed their own european officers, and seized the city.
the rebellious soldiers now proclaimed the aged and powerless bahadur shah the emperor of india, delhi was soon to become the centre of the great revolt and bahadur shah its great symbol.
this spontaneous raising of the last mughal king to the leadership of the country was recognition of the fact that the long reign of the mughal dynasty had made it the traditional symbol of indias political unity.
with this single act, the sepoys had transformed a mutiny of soldiers into a revolutionary war.
this is why rebellious sepoys from all over the country automatically turned their steps towards delhi and all indian chiefs who took part in the revolt hastened to proclaim their loyalty to the mughal emperor.
bahadur shah, in turn, under the instigation and perhaps the pressure of the sepoys, soon wrote letters to all the chiefs and rulers of india urging them to organise a confederacy of indian states to fight and replace the british regime.
the entire bengal army soon rose in revolt which spread quickly.
avadh, rohilkhand, the doab, the bundelkhand, central india, large parts of bihar, and the east punjaball shook off british authority.
in many of the princely states, rulers remained loyal to their british oveilord but the soldiers revolted the revolt of 1857 141 or remained on the brink of revolt.
many of indores troops rebelled and joined the sepoys.
similarly over 20,000 of gwaliors troops went over to tantia tope and the rani of jhansi.
many small chiefs of rajasthan and maharashtra revolted with the support of the people who were quite hostile to the british.
local rebellions also occurred in hyderabad and bengal.
the tremendous sweep and breadth of the revolt was matched by its depth.
everywhere in northern and central india, the mutiny of the sepoys was followed by popular revolts of the civilian population.
after the sepoys had destroyed british authority, the common people rose up in arms often fighting with spears and axes, bows and arrows, lathis and scythes, and crude muskets.
in many places, however, the people revolted even before the sepoys did or even when no sepoy regiments were present.
it is the wide participation in the revolt by the peasantry and the artisans which gave it real strength as well as the character of a popular revolt, especially in the areas at present included in uttar pradesh and bihar.
here the peasants and zamindars gave free expression to their grievances by attacking the moneylenders and new zamindars who had displaced them from the land.
they took advantage of the revolt to destroy the moneylenders account books and records of debts.
they also attacked the britishestablished law courts, revenue offices tehsils and revenue records, and thanas.
it is of some importance to note that in many of the battles commoners far surpassed the sepoys in numbers.
according to one estimate, of the total number of about 150,000 mn who died fighting he english in avadh, over 100,000 were civilians.
it should also be noted that even where people did not rise up in revolt, they showed strong sympathy for the rebels.
they rejoiced in the successes of the rebels and organised social boycott of those sepoys who remained loyal to the british.
they showed active hostility to british forces, tfefused lo give them help or information, and even misled them with wrong information.
w.h.
russel, who toured india in 1858 and 1859 as the correspondent of the london times, wrote that in no instance is a friendly glance directed to the white mans carriage.
.
,oh that language of the eye who can doubt who can misinterpret it it is by it alone that i have learnt our race is not even feared at times by many and that by ali it is disliked.
the popular character of the revolt of 1857 also became evident when the british tried to crush it.
they had to wage a vigorous and ruthless war not only against the rebellious sepoys but also against the people of delhi, avadh, northwestern.
provinces and agra, central india, and western bihar, burning entire villages and massacring villagers and urban people.
they had to cow.
down people with public hangings and executions without trial, thus revealing how deep the revolt was in these parts.
the sepoys and the people fought staunchly and valiantly up to the very end.
they were defeated but their spirit remained unbroken.
as rey.
duff remarked it was not a military revolt but a rebellion or revolution which alone oan account for the little progress hitherto made in extinguishing it.
similarly, the correspondent of the london times noted at the time that the british had virtually to 142 modern india reconquer india.
much of the strength of the revolt of 1857 lay in hindumuslim unity.
among the soldiers and the people as well as among the leaders there was complete cooperation as between hindus and muslims.
all the rebels recognised bahadur shah, a muslim, as their emperor.
also the first thoughts of tke hindu sepoys at meerut was to march straight to delhi.
the hindu aud muslim rebels and sepoys respected each, others sentiments.
for example, wherever the revolt was successful, orders were immediately issued banning cowslaughter out of respect for .hindu sentiments.
moreover, hindus and muslims were equally well represented at all levels of the leadership.
the rple of hindumuslim unity in the revolt was indirectly acknowledged later by aitchisin, a senior britih official, when he bitterly complained in this instance we could not.
play off the mohammedans .against the hindus.
in fact the events of 1857 clearly bring out that the people and politics of india were not basically communal in medieval times and before 1858. the stormcentres of the revolt of 1857 we re at delhi, kanpur, lucknow, bareilly, jhansi, and arrah in bihar.
at delhi the nominal and symbolio leadership belonged to the emperor bahadur shah, but the real command lay with a court of soldiers headed by general bkht khan who had led the revolt of the bareilly troops and brought them to delhi.
in the british army he had been an ordinary subedar of artillery.
bakht khan represented the popular and plebian element at the headquarters of the revolt.
after the british occupation of delhi in september 1857, the revolt of 1857 143 zinnat mahai, wife of bahadur shah ii courtesy archaeological survey of india, new delhi he went to lucknow and continued to fight the british till ho died in a battle on 13 may 1859, the emperor bahadur shah was perhaps the weakest link in the chain of leadership of the revolt, he was not firm even in his support of the revolt.
he had little genuine sympathy for the humble sepoys who n turn did not trust him fully.
he was angered by the assertion of authority by the leaders of the sepoys.
he vacillated between the desire to reign as emperor and the desire to save his skin in case the revolt was crushed by the british.
his position was also undermined by his favourite queen zeenat mahal and his sons who carried on intrigues with the enemy.
his weak personality and old age aod his lack of qualities of leadership created political weakness at the nerve centre of the revolt and did incalculable damage to it.
bahadur shah ii courtesy.
aichacoiogicai survey of india, w tr delhi 144 modern india at kanpur the revolt was led by nana sahib, the adopted son of baji rao ii, the last peshwa.
nana sahib expelled the english from kanpur with the help of the sepoys and proclaimed himself the peshwa.
at the same time he acknowledged bahadur shah as the emperor of india and declared himself to be his governor.
the chief burden of fighting on behalf of nana sahib fell on the shoulders of tantia tope, one of his most loyal servants.
tantia tope has won immortal fame by his patriotism, determined fighting, and skillful guerrilla operations.
azi mullah was another loyal servant of nana sahib.
he was an expert in political propaganda.
unfortunately, nana sahib tarnished his brave record by deceitfully killing the garrison at kanpur after he had agreed to give them safe conduct.
flj the residency, lucknow courtesy archaeological survey of india, new delhi i the revolt at luoknow was led by the begum of avadh who had proclaimed her young son, bitjis kadr, as the nawab of avadh.
helped by the sepoys at lucknow, and by the zamindars and peasants of avadh, the begum organised an allout attack on the british.
compelled to give up the city, the latter entrenched themselves in the residency building.
in the end, the eige of the residency failed as the small british garrisop fought back with exemplary fortitude and valour.
the revolt of 1857 145 one of the great leaders of the revolt of 1857 rand perhaps one of the greatest heroines of indian history, was the young rani lakshmibai of jhansi.
the young rani joined the rebels when the british refused to acknowledge her right to adopt an heir to the jhansi gaddl, annexed her state, and threatened to treat her as an instigator of the rebellion of the sepoys at jhansi.
the rani vacillated for some time.
but once she had decided to throw in her lot with the rebels, she fought like a rue heroine tales of her bravery and courage and military skill have inspired her countrymen ever since.
driven out of jhansi by the british forces after a fierce battle in which even women were seen working the batteries and distributing ammunition, she administered the oath tq her followers that with our own hands we shall not our azadshahi independent rule bury.
she captured gwalior with rani lakshmibai and tantia tope courtesy archaeological survey of india, new delhi 146 modern india the help of tantia tope and her trusted afghan guards.
maharaja sindhia, loyal to the british, made an attempt to fight the rani but most of his troops deserted to her.
sindhia sought refuge with the english at agra.
the brave rani died fighting on 1june 1858, clad in the battle dress of a soldier and mounted on a charger.
beside her fell her lifelong friend find companion, a muslim girl.
kunwar singh, a ruined and discontented zamindar of jagdishpur near arrah, was the chief organiser of the revolt in bihar.
though nearly 80 years old, he was perhaps the most outstanding military leader and strategist of the revolt, he fought the british in bihar, and, later joining hands wilh nana sahibs forces, he also campaigned in avadh and central india.
racing back home he defeated the british forces near arrah.
but this proved to be his last battle.
he had sustained a fatal wound in the fighting.
he died on 27 april 1858 in his anccstral house in the village of jagdishpur.
maulavi alunadullali of faizabad was another outstanding leader of the revolt.
he was a native of madras where he had started preaching armed rebellion.
in january 1857 he moved towards the north to faizabad where he fought a largescale battle against a company of british troops sent to stop him from preaching sedition.
when the general revolt broke out in may, he emerged as one of its acknowledged leaders in avadh.
after the defeat at lucknow, he led the rebellion in rohilkhand where he was treacherously killed by the raja of puwain who was paid rs.
50,0 as a reward by the british.
maulavi ahmadullahs patriotism, valour, and military ability have won him high praise even from british historians.
colonel g,b.
malleson has written of him if a patriot is a man who plots and fights for the independence, wrongfully destroyed, of his native country, then most certainly the maulavi yas atrue patriot he had fought manfully, honourably, and stubbornly in the field against the strangers wo had seized his country, and his memory is entitled to the respect of the brave and the true liearied of all nations.
the greatest heroes of the revolt were, however, the sepoys many of whom displayed great courage in the field of battle and thousands of whom unselfishly laid down their lives.
more than anything else, it was their determination and sacrifice that nearly led to the expulsion of the british from india.
in tins patriotic struggle, they sacrificed even their deep religious prejudices.
they had revolted on the question of the greased cartridges but now to expel the hated foreigner they freely used the same cartridges in their battles.
even though spread over a vast territory and widely popular among the people, the revolt of 185could not embrace the entire country or all the groups and classes of indian society.
most rulers of the indian states and the big zamindars, selfish to the core and fearful of british might, refused to join in.
on the contrary, the sindhia of gwalior, the holkar of indore, the nizam of hyderabad, the raja of jodhpur and other rajput rulers, the nawab of bhopal, the rulers of patiala, nabha, jind, and kashmir, the ranas of nepal, and many other ruling chiefs, and a large number of big zamindars gave active the revolt of 1857 147 help to the british in suppressing the revolt.
in fact, no more than one per cent of the chiefs of india joined the revolt.
governorgeneral canning later remarked that these rulers and chiefs acted as the breakwaters to the storm which would have otherwise swept us in one great wave.
madras, bombay, bengal and the western punjab remained undisturbed, even though the popular feeling in these provinces favoured the rebels.
moreover, except for the discontented and the dispossessed zamindars, the middle and upper classes were mostly critical of the rebels most of the propertied classes were either cool towards them or actively hostile to them.
even the taluqdars big zamindars of avadh, who had joined the revolt, abandoned it once the government gave them an assurance that their estates would be returned to them.
this made it very difficult for the peasants and soldiers of avadh to sustain a prolonged guerrilla campaign.
the money lenders were the chief targets of the villagers attacks.
they were, therefore, naturally hostile to the revolt.
but the merchants too gradually became unfriendly.
the rebels were compelled to impose heavy taxation on them in order to finance the war or to seize their stocks of foodstuffs to feed the army.
the merchants often hid their woalth and goods and refused to give free supplies to the rebels.
the zamindars f bengal also remained loyal to the british.
they were after all a creation of the british.
moreover, the hostility of bihar peasants towards their zamindars frightened the bengal zamindars.
similarly, the big merchants of bombay, calcutta, and madras supported the british because their main profits came from foreign trade and economic connections with the british merchants.
the modern educated indians also did not support the revolt.
they were repelled by the rebels appeals to superstitions and their opposition to progressive social measures.
as we have seen, the educated indians wanted to end the backwardness of their country.
they mistakenly believed .that british rule would help them accomplish these tasks of modernisation while the rebels would take the country backward.
only later did the educated indians learn from experience that foreign rule was incapable of modernising the country and that it would instead impoverish it and keep it backward.
the revolutionaries of 1857 proved to be more farsighted in this respect they had a better, instinctive understanding of the evils of foreign ruleand of the necessity to get rid of it.
on the other hand, they did not realise, as did the educated intelligentsia, that the country had fallen prey to foreigners precisely because it had stuck to rotten and outmoded customs, traditions, and institutions.
they failed to see that national salvation lay not in going back to feudal monarchy but in going forward to a modem society, a modern economy, scientific education, and modern political institutions.
jn any case, it cannot be said that the educated indians were antinational or loyal to a foreign regime.
as events after 1858 were to show, they were soon to lead a powerful and modern national movement against british rule.
whatever the reasons for the disunity of indians, it was to prove fatsfc to the revolt.
but this was not the only weakness from which the cause of the 148 modern india rebels suffered.
they were short of modern weapons and other materials of war.
most of them fought with such ancient weapons as pikes and swords.
they were also poorly organised.
the sepoys were brave and selfless but they were also illdisciplined.
sometimes they behaved more l i k e a riotous mob than a disciplined army.
the rebel units did not have a common plan of action, or authoritative heads, or centralised leadership.
the uprisings in different parts of the country were completely uncoordinated.
the leaders were joined together by a common feeling of hatred for the alien rule but by nothing else.
once they overthrew british power from an area, they did not know whad sort of power to create in its place.
they failed to evolve unity of action.
they were suspicious and jealous of one another and often indulged in suicidal quarrels for example, the begum of avadh quarrelled with maulavi ahmadullah and the mughal princes with the sepoygenerals azimullah, the political adviser of nana saheb, asked him not lo visit delhi lest he be overshadowed by the emperor.
thus, selfishness and cliquishness of the leaders sapped the strength of the revolt and prevented its consolidation.
similarly, the peasantry having destroyed revenue records and money lenders1 books, and overthrown the new zamindars, became passive, not knowing what to do next.
the british succeeded in crushing the leaders of the revolt one by one.
in fact, the weakness of the revolt went deeper than the failings of individuals.
the entire movement lacked a unified and forwardlooking programme to be implemented after the capture of power.
the movement, thus, came to consist of diverse elements, united only by their hatred of british rule, but each having different grievances and differing conceptions of the politics of free india.
this absence of a modern and the revolt of 1857 149 progressive programme enabled the reactionary princes and zamindars to seize the levers of power of the revolutionary movement.
and.
since the same feudal leaders, the mughals, the marathas and others, had earlier failed in preserving the independence of tlieir kingdoms, it was liardly to be expected that they would now succeed in founding a new allindia state.
but the feudal character of the revolt should not be stressed overmuch.
gradually the soldiers and the people were beginning to evolve a different type of leadership.
the very effort to make the revolt a success was compelling them to create new types of organisation.
as benjamin disraelie warned the british government at the time, if they did not suppress the revolt in time, they would find other characters on the stage, with whom to contend, besides the princes of india.
the lack of unity among indians was perhaps unavoidable at this stage of indian history.
modern nationalism was yet unknown in india.
patriotism meant love of ones small locality or region or at most ones slate.
common allindia interests and the consciousness that these interests bound all indians together were yet to come.
in fact the revolt of 1857 played an important role in bringing the indian people together and imparting to them the consciousness of belonging to one country.
in the end british imperialism, at the height of its power the world over, supported by most of the indian princes and chiefs, proved militarily too strong for the rebels.
the british government poured immense supplies of men, money, and arms into the country, though indians had later to repay the entire post of their own suppression.
the revolt was suppressed.
sheer courage could not win against a powerful and determined enemy who planned its every step.
the rebels were dealt an early blow when the british captured delhi on 20 september 1857 after prolonged and bitter fighting.
the aged emperor bahadur shah was taken prisoner.
the royal princes were captured and butchered on the spot.
the emperor was tried and exiled to rangoon where he died in 1862, lamenting bitterly the fate which had buried him far away from the city of his birth.
thus the great house of the mughals was linaljy and completely extinguished.
with the fall of delhi the focal point of the revolt disappeared, the other leaders of the revolt carried on the brave but unequal struggle, but the british mounted a powerful offensive against them.
john lawrence, outram, havelock, neil, campbell, and hugh rose were some of the british commanders who earned military fame in the course of this campaign.
one by one, all the great leaders of the revolt fell.
nana sahib was defeated at kanpur.
defiant to the very end and refusing to surrender, he escaped to nepal early in 1859,3iever to be heard of again.
tantia tope escaped into the jungles of central india where he carricd on bitter and brilliant guerrilla warfare until april 1859 when he was betrayed by a zamindar friend and captured while asleep.
he was put to death, after a hurried trial on 15 april 1859. the rani of jhansi had died on the field of battle earlier on 17 june 1858. by 1859, kunwar singh, bakht khan, khan bahadur khan of bareilly, rao sahib, brother of nana sahib, and maulavi ahmadullah were all dead, while the begum of avadh was compelled to hide in 150 modern india nepal.
by the end of 1859, british authority over india was fully reestablished, but the revolt had not been in vain.
it is a glorious landmark in our history.
though it  was a desperate effort to save india in the old way and under trauiiional leadership, it was the first great struggle of the indian people for freedom from british imperialism.
it paved the way for the rise of the modern national movement.
the heroic and patriotic struggle of 1857 left an unforgettable impression on the minds of the indian people and served aa a perennial source of inspiration in their later struggle for freedom.
the heroes of the revolt soon became household names in the country, even though the very mention of their names was frowned upon by the rulers.
e x e r c i s e s 1. to what extent was the revolt of 1857 the result of popular discontent against foreign rule 2. why did the sepoys of the companys army revolt 3. how would you explain the failure of the revolt 4. write short notes on a the role of the princes in the revolt, b the role of the educated indians in the revolt, c hindumuslim unity in the revolt d bahadur shah, e nana sahib, f tantia tope, g rani of jhansi, h kuovvar singh, i maulavi ahmadullah of faizabad.
c h a p t e r i x administrative changes after 1858 he revolt of 1857 gave a severe jolt to the british administration in india and made its reorganisation inevitable.
in fact, indian society, the indian government and the indian economy all underwent significant changes in the decades following the revolt.
administration an act of parliament in 1858 transferred the power to govern from the east india company to the british crown.
while authority over india had previously t been wielded by the directors of the company and the board of control, now this power was to be exercised by a secretary of state for india aided by a council.
the secretary of state was a member of the british cabinet and as such was responsible to parliament.
thus the ultimate power over india remained with parliament.
the council of the secretary of state, known as the india council, was to advise the secretary of state who could overrule its decisions.
in financial nutters, however, the approval of the council was essential.
by 1869 the council was completely subordinated to the secretary of state.
most of the members of the india council were retired britishlndian officials.
under the act, government was to be carried on as before by the governor general who was also given the title of viceroy or crowns personal representative.
he was paid two and a half lakhs of rupees a year in addition to his maily allowances.
with the passage of time the viceroy was increasingly reduced to a subordinate status in relation to the british government in matters of policy as well as execution of policy.
this tendency was of course nothing new.
already, as a result of the regulating act, pitts india act, and the later charter acts the government of india was being effectively controlled from london.
though india had been conquered by the east india company for its own benefit, it had gradually come to be ruled in the interests of the dominating sections of british society.
the india act of 1858 further strengthened this tendency.
but, in the past, a great deal of decisionmaking power was in practice left in the hands of the governorgeneral.
instructions from london took a few weeks to arrive and the government of india had often to take important policy decisions in a hurry.
control by the authorities in london was therefore often more in the nature of post facto evaluation and criticism than of actual direction.
in other words, the london authorities superintended the administration of india but did not run it.
but by 1870 a submarine cable had been laid through the red sea between england and indiar orders from london could now reach india in a matter of hours.
the secretary of state could now control the minutest details of administration and do so constantly every hour of the day.
thus the authority that exercised ifnal and detailed control and direction over indian affairs came to reside in london, thousands of miles distant from india.
no indian had a voice in the india council or the british cabinet or parliament.
indians could hardly even approach such distant masters.
under such conditions, indian opinion had even less impact on government policy than before.
on the other hand, british industrialists, merchants, and bankers increased their influence over the government of india.
this made the indian administration even more reactionary than it was before j858, for now even the pretence of liberalism was gradually given up.
in india the act of 1858 provided that the governorgeneral would have an executive council whose members were to act as heads of different departments 152 modern india and as his official advisers.
the position of the members of the council was similar to that of cabinet ministers.
originally there were five members of this council but by 1918 there were six ordinary members, apart from the commanderinchief who headed the army department, the council discussed all important matters and decided them by a majority vote but the governor general had the power to override any important decision of the council.
in fact, gradually all power was concentrated in the governorgenerals hands.
the indian councils act of 1861 enlarged the governorgenerals council for the purpose of making laws in which capacity it was known as the imperial legislative council.
the governorgeneral was authorised to add to his executive council bettyfeen six and twelve members of whom at least half had to be nonofficials who could be indian or english.
the imperial legislative council possessed no ral powers and should not be seen as a sort of elementary or weak parliament.
it was merely an advisory body.
it could not discuss any important measure, and no financial measures at all, without the previous approval of the government, it had no control over the budget.. it could not discuss the aotions of the administration the membeis could not even ask questions about them.
in other words, the legislative council had no control over the executive.
moreover, no bill passed by it could become an act till it was approved by the governorgeneral.
on top of all this, the administrative cha.nce8 after 1 85 8 15 3 secretary of state could disallow any of its acts.
thus, the only important function of the legislative council was to ditto official measures and give them the appearance of having been passed by a legislative body.
in theory, the non official indian members were added to the council to represent indian views, since it was believed by many british officials and statesmen that the revolt of 1857 would not have occurred if indian views had been known, to the rulers.
but the indian members of the legislative council were few in number and were not elected by the indian people but were nominated by the governorgeneral whose choice invariably fell on princes and their ministers, big zamindars, big merchants, or retired senior government officials.
they were thoroughly unrepresentative of the indian people or of the growing nationalist opinion.
once again, indians had no hand in the processes of government.
the government of india remained, as before 1858, an alien despotism.
this was, moreover, no accident, but a conscious policy.
charles wood, the secretary of state for india, while moving the indian councils bill of 1861, said all experience teaches us that where a dominant race rules anotherthe mildest form of governments a despotism.
provincial administration the british had divided india for administrative convenience into provinces, three , of whichbengal, madras and bombay were known as presidencies.
the presidencies were administered by a governor and his executive council of three, who were appointed by the crown.
the presidency governments possessed more rights and powers than other provinces which were administered by lieutenant governors and chief commissioners appointed by the governorgeneral.
the provincial governments enjoyed a great deal of autonomy before 1833 when their power to pass laws was taken away and their expenditure subjected to strict central oontrol.
but experience soon showed that a vast country like india could not be efficiently administered on the principle of strict centralisation.
the act of 1861 marked the turning of the tide pf centralisation.
it laid down that legislative councils similar to that of lhp centre should be established first in bombay, madras and bengal and then in other provinces.
the provincial legislative councils too were mere advisory bodies consisting of officials and four to eight nonofficial indians and englishmen.
they too lacked the powers, oi a democratic parliament.
the evil of extreme centralisation was most ctbvious in the field pf finance.
the revenues from all over the country and liom,different sources were gathered at the centre and then distributed by it to lh provincial governments.
the centcal government exercised strict control over the smallest details of provincial expenditure.
but this system proved quite wasteful in practice.
t was not possible for the central government to supervise the efficient collection of revenues by a provincial government or to keep adequate check over its expenditure.
on the one hand, the two governments constantly quarrelled over minute details of administration and 154 modern india expenditure, and, on the other, a provincial government had no motive to be economical.
the authorities therefore decided to decentralise public finance.
the first step in the direction of separating central and provincial finances was taken in 1870 by lord mayo.
the provincial governments were granted fixed sums out of central revenues for the administration of certain services like police, jails, education, medical services, and roads and were asked to administer them as they wished.
they could increase or reduce allotments to any of these departments within the limits of the total funds given to them.
lord mayos scheme was enlarged in 1877 by lord lytton who transferred to the provinces certain other heads of expenditure like land revenue, excise, general administration, and law and justice.
to meet the additional expenditure a provincial government was to get a fixed share of the income realised from that province from certain sources like stamps, excise taxes, and income tax.
further changes in these arrangements were made in 1.882 during the viceroyalty of lord ripon.
the system of giving fixed grants to the provinces was ended and, instead, a province was to get the entire income within it from certain sources of revenue and a fixed share of the income from other sources, thus all sources of revenue were now divided inio threegeneral, provincial, and those to be divided between the centre and the provinces.
the financial arrangements between the centre and the provinces were to be reviewed every five years.
the different measures of financial decentralisation discussed above did not really mean the beginning of genuine provincial autonomy or of indian participation in provincial administration.
they were much more in the nature of administrative reorganisation whose chief aims were to keep down expenditure and increase income.
in theory as well as in practice the central government remained supreme and continued to exetcise effective and detailed control over the provincial governments.
this was inevitable fot both the central government and the provincial governments were completely subordinated to the secretary of state mid the british government.
local bodies financial difficulties led the government to further decentralise administration by1 promoting local government through municipalities and district boards.
the industrial revolution gradually, transformed european economy and society in the 19th century.
indias increasing contact with europe and new modes df imperialism and economic exploitation made it necessary that some of the european .advances in economy, sanitation, and education should be transplanted in india.
moreover, the rising indian nationalist movement demanded the introduction of modern improvements in civic life.
thus the need for the education of the masses, sanitation, water supply, better roads, and other civic amenities was increasingly felt.
the government could no longer afford to ignore it.
but its finances were already in disorder due to heavy expenditure on the army and the railways.
it could not increase its income through new taxes as the burden of the existing taxation was already very heavy on the poor and further addition lb it was likely to create discontent against the government.
on the other hand, the administrative changes after 1858 155 government did not want to tax the upper classes.
but the authorities felt that the people would not mind paying new taxes if they knew that their proceeds would be spent on their own welfare.
it was therefore decided to transfer local services like education, health, sanitation, and water supply to local bodies who would finance them through local taxes.
many englishmen had pressed for the formation of local bodies on pother ground also.
they believed that associating indians with the administration in some capacity or the other would prevent their becoming politically disaffected.
this association could take place at the level of local bodies without in any way endangering british monopoly of power in india.
local bodies were ikbt formed between 1864 and 1868, but almost in every case they consisted of nominated members and were presided over by district magistrates.
they did not, therefore, representlocal self government at ali nor dide intelligent indians accept them as such.
they looked upon them a instruments for the extraction of additional taxes from the people.
a step forward, iliouglaa veiy hesitant and inadequate one, was taken in 1882 by lord ripon government.
a government resolution laid down the policy of admii.i.iering local affairs largely through rural and, urban local bodies, a majority of whose members would be nonofficials.
these nonofficial members would be elected by the people wherever and whenever officials felt that it was possible to introduce elections.
the resolution also permitted the election of a nonofficial as chairman of a locl body.
provincial acts were passed to implement this resolution.
but lin elected members were in a minority in all the district boards and in maiv of the municipalities.
they were, moreover, elected by a small number of voters since the right to vote was severely restricted.
district officials continued to act as presidents of district boards though non officials gradually became chairmen of municipal committees, the government also retained he right to exercise strict control over he activities of the local bodies and to suspend and supercede hem at its own discretion.
the result was that except in the presidency pitips of calcutta, madras, and bombay the local bodies functioned jiistjike departments of the government and were in no way good examples, of local selfgovernment.
ah the same, the political conscious indians welcomed ripons resolution and worked actively in these local bodies with the hope that in time they could be transformed into effective organs of local selfgovernment.
changes in the army the indian army was carefully reorganised after 1858. some changcs were made necessary by the transfer of power to the crown.
thus the east india companys european forces were merged with the crown troops.
but the army was reorganised most of al to prevent the recurrence of another revolt.
the rulers had seen that their bayonets were the only secure foundation of their rule.
several steps were taken to minimise, if not completely eliminate, the capacity of indian soldiers to revolt.
firstly, the domination of the army by its european branch was carefully guaranteed.
the proportion of europeans to indians in the army was raised and fined at 6ne to two in the bengal army and two to five in he madras and bombay armies.
moreover, the european troops were kept in 156 modern india key geographical and military positions.
the crucial branches of the army like artillery and, later in the 20th century, tanks and armoured corps were put exclusively in european hands.
the older policy of excluding indians from the officer carps was strictly maintained.
till 1914 no indian could rise higher than the rank of a sitbedar secondly, the organisation of the indian section of ihe army was based on the policy of balance and counterpoise or divide and rule1  so as to prevent its chances of uniting again in an anliflntish uprising.
discrimination on the basis of caste, region, and religion was practised in recruitment to he army, a fiction was created that indians consisted of martial and nonmartial classes.
soldiers from avadh, bihar, central india, and south,india, who had first helped the british conquer india but had later taken part in the revolt of 18s7, were declared to be noilmartial.
they were no longer taken in the at my on a large scale.
on the other hand, the sikhs, gurlfbas, and pathans, who had assisted in the suppression of the revolt, were declared to be martial and were recruited in large numbers in addition, indian regiments were made a mixture of various castcs and groups which were so placed as to balance each other.
communal, caste, tribal and regional loyalties were encouraged among the soldiers so that the sentiment of nationalism would riot grow among them, v for example, caste and communal companies were introduced in most regimciiife, chailes wood,secretary of state for india, wrote to the viceroy canning in 1861 i never wish lo see again a great arny, very miilh the ame in ils feeiings and pie jujiccsind connections, iionhdent in its strength, and so disposed to rise in jhillm i.tfithfr ii orit refluent muilniri, i should likclo have the riefcf .regiment o alii.
tlai ,i aoiiij h.rejd t lire into ,i ... .
thus the indian army remained a purely mercenary force.
moreover, every effort was made to keep it separated from the life and thoughts of the rest of the population.
it was isolated from nationalist ideas by every possible means.
newspapers, journals, and nationalist publications were prevented from reaching the soldiers, but, as we shall see later, all such efforts failed in the long run and sections of the indian army played an important role in our struggle for freedom.
the indian army became in time a very costly military machine.
in 1904 it absorbed nearly 52 per cent of the indian revenues.
this was because it served more than one purpose.
india, being the most prized colonial possession of the time, had to be constantly defended from the competing imperialisms of russia, france, and germany.
this led to a big incease in the size of the indian army.
secondly, the indian troops were not maintained for indias defence alone.
they were also often employed to extend or consolidate british power and possessions in asia and africa.
lastly, the british section of the army served as an army of occupation.
it was the ultimate guarantee of the british hold over the country.
its cost had, however, to be met by the indian revenues it was in fact a very heavy burden on them.
public services we have seen above that indians had little control over the government of india.
they were not permitted to play any part in the making of laws or in determining administrative policies.
in addition, they were excluded from the administrative changes after 1858 157 bureaucracy which put these policies into practice.
all positions of power and responsibility in the administration were occupicd by the members of the indian civil service who were recruited through an annual open competitive examination held in london.
indians also could sit in this examination.
satyendranath tagore, brother of rabindranath tagore, was the first indian to do so successfully in 1863. almost every year thereafter one or two indians joined the covcted ranks of the civil service, but their number was negligible compared to the english entrants.
in practice, the doors of the civil service remained barred to indians for they suffered from numerous handicaps.
the competitive examination was held in far away london.
it was conducted through the medium of the alien english language.
it was based on classical greek and jlatin learning which could be acquired only after a prolonged and costly course of studies in fcqglarul.
in addition, the maximum age for entry into the civil service was gradually reduced from twentyihree in 1859 to nineteen in 1878. if the young indian of twentythree found it difficult to succeed in the civil service competition, the indian 6f nineteen found it impossible do 40. in other departments of administrationpolice, public works depart ment, medicine, posts and telegraphs, forests, engineering, customs, and later railwaysthe superior and highly paid posts werp likewise reserved for british citizens.
this preponderance of europeans in all strategic posts was not acciden tal.
the rulers of india believed it to be an essential condition for the maintenance of british supremacy in india.
thus lord kimberley, the secretary of state, laid down in 1893 that it is indispensable that an.i adequate number of the members of the civil service shall always be i  europeans  and the viceroy, lord lansdowne, stressed the absolute necessity of keeping the government of this widespread empire in european hands, if that empire is to be maintained.
under indian pressure the different administrative services were gradually indianised after 1918 but the positions of control and authority were still kept in british hands.
moreover, the people soon discovered 1hat indianisation of these services had not put any part of political power in their hands.
the indians m these services functioned as agents of british rule and loyally seized britains imperial purposes.
relations with tbe princely states the revolt of 1857 led the british to reverse their policy towards the indian states.
before 1857, they had availed themselves of every opportu nity to annex princely states.
this policy was now abandoned.
most of the indian princes had not only remained loyat to the british but had actively aided the latter in suppressing the revolt.
as lord canning, the viceroy, put it, they bad acted as  breakwaters in the storm, their loyalty was now rewarded with the announcement that their right to adopt heirs would be respected arvd the integrity of their territories guaranteed against future annexation.
moreover, the experience of the revolt had convinced the 158 modern india british authorities that the princely states could serve as useful allies and supporters in case of popular opposition or revolt.
canning wrote ir i860 it was long ago said by sir john malcolm that if we made at india into ztllahs districts, it was not in the nature of things that our empire should last 50 years but that if we could keep up a number of native states without political power, but as royal inttruipent, we should.exit in india as long as our naval supremacy was maintained.
or the substantial truth of this opinion i have no doubt, and the recent event have made it more deserving of our attention than ever.
it was, therefore, decided to use the princely states as firm props of british rule in india.
even the british historian p.e.
roberts has recognised  to preserve them as a bulwark of the empire has ever since been a principle of british policy,  their perpetuation was, however, only one aspect of the british policy towards the princely state, the other was their complete subordination to the british authorities.
while even before the, revolt of 1857 the   .
.
i  .
british had in practice interfered in the internal afairs of these states, in theory they had been considered as subsidiary but sovereign powers this position was now entirely changed.
as the price of their continued existence the princes were made to acknowledge britain as the paramount power.
canning declared tn 1862 that the crown of england stood forward, the unquestioned ruler and paramount power in al india.
in 1876, queen victoria assumed ihe title of the empress or india to emphasise british sovereignty over the entire indian subcontinent.
lord curzon later made it clear that the princes ruled theic states merely as agents of the british crown.
the princes accepted this subordinate position and willingly became junior partners in the empire because they were assured of their continued existence as rulers of their states.
as the paramount power, the british claimed the right to supervise the internal government of the princely states.
they not only interfered in the day to day administration through the residents but insisted on appointing and dismissing ministers and other high officials sometimes ihe rulers themselves were removed or deprived of their powers.
one motive for such interference was provided by the british desire to give these states a modern administration so that their integration with british india would be complete.
this integration and the consequent interference were also encouraged by the development of allindia railways, postal and telegraph systems, currency, and a common economic life.
another motive for interference was provided by the growth of popular democratic and nationalist movements in many of the states.
on the one hand, the british authorities helped the rulers suppress these movements on the other, they tried to eliminate the most serious of administrative abuses in these states.
the changed british policy towards the princely states is illustrated by the cases of mysore and baroda.
lord bentinck had deposed the ruler of mysore in 1831 and taken over the administration of the state.
after 1868 the government recognised the adopted heir of the old ruler and m 1881 the state was fully restored to the young maharajah.
on the otlier hand, the ruler of baroda, malhar rao gaekwad, was accused in 1874 of misrule and of trying to poison the british resident and was deposed after a brief trial.
baroda was not however, annexed instead, a young man of the oaekwad family was put on the throne.
administrative policles administrative changes after 1858 159 the british attitude towards india and, consequently, their policies in india changed for the worse after the revolt or 1857. while before 18j7 tlyy had tried, however halfheartedly and hesitatingly, to modernise india, they now consciously began to follow reactionary policies.
as he historian percival spear has put it, the indian governments honeymoon with progress was over.
we have seen above how the organs of administrative control in india and in england, the indian army and the civil service were reorganised to exclude indians from an effective share in administration.
previously at least lipservice had been paid to the idea that the british were preparing the indians for self government.
the view was now openly put forward hat the indians were unfit to rule themselves and that they must be ruled by britain for an indefinite period.
this reactionary policy was reflected in many fields.
divide and rule  the british had conquered india by taking advantage of the disunity among the indian powrs and by playing them against one another after 1858 they continued to follow this policy of divide and rule by turning the princes against the people, province against province, caste against caste, group against group, and, above all, hindus against muslims.
the unity displayed by hindus and muslims during the revolt of 1857 had disturbed the foreign rulers.
they were determined to break this unity so as to weaken the rising nationalist movement.
in fact, they missed no opportunity to do so.
immediately after the revolt they repressed muslims, confiscated their lands and property on a large scale, and declared hindus to be heir favourites.
after 1870 this policy was reversed and an attempt was made to turn upper class and middle class muslims against the nationalist movement.
the government cleverly used the attractions of government servicc to create a split along religious lines among the educated indians because of industrial and commercial backwardness and the near absence of social services, the educated indians depended almost entirely on government service.
there were few other openings for them this led to keen competition among them for the available government posts.
the government utilised this competition to fan provincial and communal rivalry and hatred.
it promised official favours on a communal basis n return for loyally and so played the educated muslims against the educated hindus.
hostility to educated indians the governmertt of india had actively encouraged modern education after 1833. the universities or calcutta, bombay and madras were started in 1857 and higher education spread rapidly thereafter.
many british officials commended the refusal by educated indians to participate in the revolt of 1857. but this favourable official attitude towards the oducaled indian soon changed been use some of hem had begun to ,use iheit recently acquired modern knowledge to umlyse ihi imperialistic administrative changes after 1838 160 character of british rue and to put forward demands for indian participation in administration.
the officials became actively hostile to higher education and to the educated indians when the latter began to organise a nationalist movement among the people and founded the indian national congress in 1885. the officials ncw took active steps to curtail higher education.
they sneered at the educated indians whom they commonly referred to as babus.
thus the british turned against that group of indians who had imbibed modern western knowledge and who stood for progress along modern lines.
such progress was, however, opposed to the basic interests and policies of british imperialism in india.
the official opposition to the educated indians ant higher education shows that british rule in india had already exhausted whatever potentialities for progress it originally possessed.
attitude towards the zamindars while being hostile to the forward looking educated indians, the british now turned for friendship to the most reactionary group of indians, the princes, the zamindars, and the landlords.
we have already examined above the changed policy towards the princes and the official attempt to use them as a dam against the rise of popular and nationalist movements.
the zamindars and landlords too were placated in the same manner.
for example, the lands of most of the talukdais of avadh were restored to them.
the zamindars and landlords were now hailed as the traditional and natural leaders of the indian people, their interests and privileges were protected.
they were secured in ihe possession of their land at the cost of the peasants and were utilised as counter weights against the nationalistminded intelligentsia.
the viceroy lord lyitoa openly declared in 185j6 that the crown of england should henceforth be identified with the hopes, the aspirations, the sympathies and interests of a powerful native aristocracy.
the zamindars and landlords in return recognised that their position was closely bound up with the maintenance of british rule and became its only firm supporters.
, attitude tg wards social reforms as a part of the policy of alliance with the conservative classes, the british abandoned their previous policy of helping the social reformers.
they believed that their measures of social reform, such as the abolition of the custom of sati and permission to widows to remarry, had been a major cause of the revolt of 157. they therefore gradually began to side with orthodox.
opinion and stopped their support to the reformers.
thus, as jawaharlal nehru has put it in the discovery of india, because of this natural alliance of the british power with the reactionaries in india, it became the guardian and upholder of many an evil custom and practice, which it otherwise condemned.
in fact, the british were in this respect on the horns of a dilemma.
if they favoured social reform and passed laws to this effect, he orthodox indians opposed them and declared that a government of foreigners had no right to interfere in the internal social affairs of the indians.
on the other hand, if they did not pass such laws, they helped perpetuate social evils and were condemned by socially pro gressive indians.
it may, however, be noted that the british did not always remain neutral on social questions.
by supporting the status quo they indirectly gave protection to existing social evils.
moreover, by encouraging administrative changes after 1858 161 casteism and communalism for political purposes, they actively encouraged social reaction.
extreme backwardness of social services while social services like education, sanitation and public health, water supply, and rural roads made rapid progress in europe during he 19th century, in india hey remained al an extremely backward level.
the government of india spent most of its large income on the army and wars and the administrative services and starved ihe social services.
for example, in 1886, of its total net revenue of nearly rs.
47.00 crores the governmentof india spent nearly 19.41 crores on the army and 17 crores on civil administration but less than 2 crores on education, medicine, and public health and only 65 lakhs on irrigation.
the few halting steps that were taken in the direction of providing services like sanitation, water supply, and public health were usually confined to urban areas, and that too to the i so called civil lines or british or modern parts of the cities.
they mainly served the europeans and a handful of upper class indians who lived in the european part of the cities.
labour legislation the condition of workers in modern factories and plantations in the 9th century was miserable.
they had to work between 12 and 16 hours a day and there was no weekly day of rest.
women and children worked the same long hours as men.
the wages were extremely low, ranging from rs.
4 to to 20 per month.
the factories were overcrowded, badly lighted and aired, and completely unhygienic.
work on machines was hazardous, and accidents very common.
the government ot india, which was generally procapitalist, took some halfhearted and totally inadequate steps to mitigate the sorry state of affairs in the modern factories, many of which were owned by indians.
in this it was only in part moved by humanitarian considerations.
the manufacturers of britain put constant pressure on it to pass factory laws.
they were afraid that cheap labour would enable indian manufacturers to outsell them in the indian market.
the first indian factory act was passed in 1881. the act dealt primarily with the problem of child labour.
it laid down that children below 7 could not work in factories, while children between 7 qnd 12 would not work for more than 9 hours a day.
children would also get four holidays in a month.
the act also provided for the proper fencing off of dangerous machinery.
the second indian factories act was passed in 1891. it provided for a weekly holiday for all workers.
working hour9 for women were fixed at 11 per day while daily hours of work for children were reduced to 7. hours of work for men were still left unregulated.
neither of the two acts applied to britishowned tea and coffee plantations.
on the contrary, the government gave every help to the foreign planters to exploit their workers in a most ruthless manner.
most of the tea plantations were situated in assam which was very thinly populated and had an unhealthy climate.
labour to work the plantations had therefore to be brought from outside.
the planters would nut attract workers from outside by paying high wages.
instead they used cocrcion and fraud to recruit them and then keep them as virtual slaves 162 modern india on the plantations.
the government of india gave planters fhll help and passed penal laws in 1863, 1865, 1870, 1873 and 1882 to enable them to do so.
once a labourer had signed a contract to go and work in a plantation he could not refuse to do so.
any breach of contract by a labourer was a criminal offence, the planter also having the power to arrest him.
better labour laws were, however, passed in the 20th century under the pressure of the rising trade union movement.
still, the condition of the indian working class remained extremely depressed and deplorable.
restrictions on the press the british had introduced the printing press in india and thus initiated the development of the modern press.
the educated indians had immediately recognised that the press could play a great role in educating public opinion and in influencing government policies through criticism and censure.
rammohun roy, vidyasagar, dadabhai naoroji, justice ranade, surendranath banerjea, lolcmanya tilak, g. subramaniya lyer, c. k.arhnakara menon, madan mohan malaviya, lala lajpat rai, bipin chandra pal, and other indian leaders played an important part in starting newspapers and making them a powerful political force.
the press had gradually become a major weapon of the nationalist movement.
the indian press was freed of restrictions by charles metcalfe in 1835. this step had been welcomed enthusiastically by the educated indians.
it was one of the reasons why they had for sometime supported british rule in india.
but the nationalists gradually began to use the.
press to arouse national consciousness among the people and to sharply criticise the reactionary policies of the government., this turned the officials against the indian press and they decided to curb its freedom.
this was attempted by passing the vernacular press act in 1878. this act put serious restrictions on the freedom of the indian language newspapers.
indian publjc opinion was now fully aroused and it protested loudly against the passage of this act.
this protest had immediate effect and the act was repealed in 1882. for nearly 25 years thereafter the indian press enjoyed considerable freedom.
but the rise of the militant swadeshi and boycott movement after 1905 once again led to the enactment of repressive press faws in 1908 and 910. racial antagonism the british in india had always held aloof from the indians and felt themselves to be racially superior the revolt of 1857 and the atrocities committed by both sides had further widened the gulf between the indians and he british who now began to openly assert the doctrine of racial supremacy and practise racial arrogance railway compartments, waiting rooms at railway stations, parks, hotels, swimming pools, clubs clc .
leserved for europeans only were visible manifestations of this racialism the indians fell humiliated.
in he words of jnwahailnl nchfu wc m india hive known racialism in all rts forms ever sincc the commencement of british rule the whole ideology of this rule was that of harrenvolk and i he master race, and the administrative changes after 1858 163 structure of government was based upon it indeed i he idea of a master rate is inherent in imperialism there was no subterfuge about it, it was proclaimed in unambiguous language by those in authority.
more powerful than words was the practice that accompanied them, and generation after generation and year after year, india as a nation and indians as individuals, were subjected to insult, humiliation and contemptuous treatment.
the english were an imperial race, we were told, with the godgiven right to govern ns and keep us insubjectlon if we protested we were reminded of the tiger qualities of an imperial race.
e x e r c i s e s 1. discuss the important changes made in the administration of india after 1858 especially in the fields of constitutional change, provincial administration, local bodies, the army, and the public services.
2. what changes did british attitude undergo towards indiaa unity, the educated indians, the zamindars and princes, and social reforms after the revolt of 1857 3. write short notes on a the imperial legislative council after 1861, b backwardness of social services, e factory latour legislation of 1881 and 1891, d plantation labour,e freedom of the press.
c h a p t e r x india and her neighbours nder british rule, india developed relations with its neighbours on a new basis.
this was the result of two factors.
the development of modern means of communication and the political and administrative consolidation of the country impelled the government of india to reach out to the natural, geographical frontiers of india.
this was essential both for.
defence and for internal cohesion.
inevitably this tended to lead to some border clashes.
unfortunately, sometimes the government of india went beyond the natural and traditional frontiers.
the other new factor was the alien character of the government of india.
the foreign policy of a free country is basically different from the foreign policy of a country ruled by a foreign power.
in the former case it is based on the needs and interests of the people of the country in the latter, it serves primarily the interests of the ruling country.
in indias case, the foreign policy that the government of india followed was dictated by the british government in london.
the british government had two major aims in asia and africa protection of its invaluable indian empire and the expansion of british commerce and other economic interests in africa and asia.
both these aims led to british expansion and territorial conquests outside indias natural frontiers.
moreover, these aims brought the british government into conflict with other imperialist nations of europe who also wanted extension of their territorial possessions and commerce in afroasian lands.
in fact, the years between 1870 and 1914 witnessed an intense struggle bet ween the european powers for colonies and markets in africa and asia.
the developed capitalist countries of europe and north america hd a surplus of manufactured goods to sell and surplus capital to invest.
they also needed agricultural and mineral raw materials to feed their industries.
this led to intense commercial rivalry among european states.
the governments of europe were willing to promote their commercial interests even by the use of force against their rivals as well as against the country to be commercially penetrated.
moreover, political control of economically backward countries enabled an imperialist country to have secure markets for its goods and capital as well as souices of raw materials and to keep out its rival.
thus the different imperialist countries struggled to extend their control over different aieas ot ihc world.
during this period, the continent of africa was divided up among the european u india and her nfcigh hours 165 powers.
russia expanded both in central asia and east asia.
germany, britain and russia competed for control over the decaying ottoman empice in turkey, west asia, and iran.
franoe occupied indochina in the 1880s, and both britain and france competed for control over thailand and north burma.
hawaii and philippines were conquered by the united states of america in 1898, and korea by japan in 1905. from 1895 an intense competition for control over different parts of the chinese empire broke out among the powers.
britain, having secured the linns share in the colonial division of the world, faced rivals on all sides.
for example, at different periods, british aims and ambitions came into conflict with the aims and ambitions of france, russia, and germany.
the desire to defend their indian empire, to promote british economic interests, and to keep the other european powers at arms length from india often led the british indian government to commit aggression on indias neighbours.
in other words, during the period of british domination indias relations with its neighbours were ultimately determined by the needs of british imperialism.
but, while indian foreign policy served british imperialism, the cost of ts implementation was borne by india.
in pursuance of british interests, india had to wage many wars againct its neighbours the indian soldiers had to shed their blood and the indian taxpayers had to meet the heavy cost.
moreover, the indian army was often used in africa and asia to fight britains battles.
consequently, military expenditure absorbed a large part of indias governmental expenditure.
for example, more than half of indias revenuesnearly 52 per cent to be exactwas spent on the army in 1904. war with nepal, 1814 the british desire to extend their indian empire to its natural geographical frontier brought them into conflict, first of all, with the northern kingdom of nepal.
the nepal valley had been conquered in 1768 by the gurkhas, a western himalayan tribe.
they had gradually built up a powerful army and extended their sway from bhutan in the east to the river sutlej in the wfest.
from the nepal tarai they now began to push southward.
in the meanwhile, the british conqiired gorakhpur in 1801. this brought the two expanding powers face to face across an illdefined border.
in october 1814 a border clash between the border police of the two countries led to open war.
the british officials had expected an easy walkover especially as their army attacked all along the 600 mile frontier.
but the gurkhas defended themselves with vigour and bravery.
the british armies were defeated again and again.
charles metcalfe, a senior britishindian official, wrote at the time wc have met with an enemy who shows decidedly greater bravery and greater steadiness than our troops possess and it is impossible to say what may be the end of such a reverse of the order of things.
in some instances our troops, european and native, have been repulsed by inferior numbers with sticks and stones.
in others our troops have been charged by the enemy sword in hand, and driven for miles like a flock of sheep in short, i, who have always thought our power in india precarious, cannot help thinking that our downfall has already commenced.
166 modern india out power rested solely on our military superiority.
with respect to one enemy, that is gone.
in the long run, however, the gurkhas could not survive.
the british were far superior in men, money, and materials.
in april 1815 they occupied kumaon, and on 15th may they forced the brilliant gurkha commander amar singh thapa to surrender.
the government of nepal was now compelled to sue for peace but the negotiations for peace soon broke down.
the government of nepal would not accept the british demand for the stationing of a resident at khatmandu, nepals capital.
it realised fully well that to accept a subsidiary alliance with the british amounted to signing away nepals independence.
fighting was resumed early in 1816. the british forces won important victories and reached within 50 miles of khatmandu.
in the end, the nepal government had to make peace on british terms.
it accepted a british resident.
it ceded the districts of garhwal and kumaon and abandoned claims to the tafai areas.
it also withdrew from sikkim the agreement held many advantages for the british.
their indian empire now reached ihe himalayas.
they gained greater facilities for trade with central asia.
they also obtained sites for important hillstations such as simla, mussoorie, and nainilal.
moreover the gurkhas gave added strength to the britishindian army by joining it in large numbers.
the relations of the british with nepal were quite friendly thereafter.
both parties to the war of 1814 had learnt to respect each others fighting capacity and preferred to live at peace with each other.
conquest of banna through three successive wars the independent kingdom of burma was conquered by the british during the 19th century.
the conflict between burma and british india was initiated by border clashes.
it was fanned by expansionist urges.
the british merchants cast covetous glances on the forest resources of burma and were keen to promote export of their manufactures among its people.
the british authorities also wanted to modern india check ihe spread of french commercial and political influence in burma and the 170 modern india rest of southeast asia.
the first burmese war, 182426 burma and british india developed a common frontier at the close of the 18th century when both were expanding powers.
after centuries of internal strife, burma was united by king alaungpaya between 175260. his successor, bodawpaya, ruling from ava on the river irrawaddi repeatedly invaded siam, repelled many chinese invasions, and conquered the border states of arakan 1785 and manipur 1813 bringing burmas border up to that of british india.
continuing his westward expansion, he threatened assam and the brahmaputra valley.
finally, in 1822, the burmese conquered assam.
the burmese occupation of arakan and assam led to conti nuous friction along the illdefined border between bengal and burma.
one of the sources of his friction was provided by the arakanese fugitives who had sought shelter in the chittagong district.
from here, they organised regular raids into burmeseheld arakan.
when defeated they would escape into british territory.
the burmese government pressed ihe british authorities to take action against the insurgents and to hand them over to the burmese authorities.
moreover, the burmese forces, chasing the insurgents, would often cross into indian territory.
clashes on the chittagongarkan frontier came to a head over the possession of shahpuri island in 1823 which was first occupied by the burmese and then by the british.
the burmese proposal for neutralisation of the island was rejected by the british and tension between the two began to mount, burmese occupation of manipur and assam provided another source of conflict between the two.
it was looked upon by the british authorities as a serious threat to their position in india.
to counter this threat they established british influence over the strategic border states of cachar and jaintia.
the burmese were angered by this action and marched their troops into cachar.
a clash between burmese and british troops ensued, the burmese being compelled to withdraw into manipur.
the british indian authorities now seized this opportunity to declare war on burma.
for several decades they had been trying to persuade the government of burma to sign a commercial treaty with them and to exclude french traders from burma.
nor were they happy to have a strong neighbour who constantly bragged of his strength.
they believed that burmese power should be broken as soon as possible, especially as they felt that british power was at the time far superior to that of the burmese.
the burmese, on their part, did nothing to avoid war.
the burmese rulers had been long isolated from tbe world and did not correctly assess the strength of the enemy.
they were also led to believe that an anglo burmese war would lead many of the indian powers to rebel.
the war was officially declared on 24 february 1824. after an initial setback, the british forces drove the burmese out of assam, cachar, manipur and arakan.
the british expeditionary forces by sea occupied rangoon in may 1824 and reached within 45 miles of the capital at ava.
the famous burmese general maha bandula was killed in april 1825. but burmese resistance was tough and india and her.
neighbours 171 determined.
especially effective was guerrilla warfare in the jungles.
the rainy climate and virulent diseases added to the cruelty of the war.
fever and dysentry killed more people than the war.
in rangoon 3,160 died in hospitals and 166 on the battlefield.
in all the british lost 15,000 soldiers out of the 40,000 they had landed in burma.
moreover, the war was proving financially extremely costly.
thus the british, who were winning the war, as well as the burmese, who were losing it, were glad to make peace which came in february 1826 with the treaty of yandabo.
the government of burma agreed i to pay one crore rupees as war compensation 2 t cede its coastal provinces of arakan and tenasserim 3 to abandon all claims to assam, cachar, and jaintia 4 to recognise manipur as an independent state 5 to negotiate a commercial treaty with britain 6 and to accept a british resident at ava while posting a burmese envoy at calcutta.
by this treaty the british deprived burma of most of its coastline, and acquired a firm base in burma for future expansion.
the second burmese war, 1852 if the first burmese war was in part the result of border clashes, the second burmese war which broke out in 1852 was almost wholly the result of british commercial greed.
british timber firms had begun to take interest in the timber resources of upper burma.
moreover, the large population of burma appeared to the british to be a vast market for the sale of british cotton goods and other manufactures.
the british, already in occu pation of burmas two coastal provinces, now wanted to establish commercial relations with the rest of the country, but, the burmese government would not permit further foreign commercial penetration.
british merchants now began to complain of lack of facilities for trade and of oppressive treatment by the burmese authorities at rangoon.
the fact of the matter was that british imperialism was at its zenith and the british believed themselves tobe a superior people.
british merchants had begun to believe that they had a divine right to force their trade upon others.
at this time the aggressive lord dalhousie became the governorgeneral of india.
he was determined to heighten british imperial prestige and to push british interests in burma.
the government of india, he wrote in a minute, could never, consistently with its own safety, permit itself to stand for a single day in m attitude of inferiority towards a native power, and least of all towards the court of ava.
as an excuse for armed intervention in burma, dalhousie took up the frivolous and petty complaint of two british sea captains that the governor of rangoon had extorted nearly 1,000 rupees from them.
in november 1851 he sent an envoy, accompanied by several ships of war, to rangoon to demand compensation for the two british merchants.
the british envoy, commodore lambert, behaved in an aggressive and unwarranted manner.
on reaching rangoon he demanded the removal of the governor of rangoon before he would agree to negotiate.
the court at ava was frightened by the show of british strength and agreed to recall the governor of rangoon and to investigate british complaints.
but the haughty british envoy was determined to provoke a conflict.
he started a blockade of rangoon and attacked and destroyed 172 modern india over 150 small ships in tke port.
the burmese government agreed to accept a british resident at rangoon and to pay the full compensi tion demanded by the british.
the government of india now turned on the screw and pushed up their demands to an exorbitant level.
titey demanded the recall of the new governor of rangoon and also a full apology for alleged insults to their envoy, such demands could hardly be accepted by an independent government.
obviously, the british desired to strengthen their hold over burma by peace or by war before their trade competitors, the french or the americans, could establish themselves there.
a full british expedition was despatched to burma in april 1852. this time the war was much shorter than in 182526 and the british victory was more decisive.
rangoon was immediately captured and then other important townsbassein, pegu, prome fell to the british.
burma was at this time undergoing a struggle forpower.
the burmese king, mindon, who had deposed his halfbrother, king pagan min, in a struggle for jower in february 1853, was hardly in a position to fight the british at the same time he could not openly agree to surrender burmese territory.
consequently, there were no official negotiations for peace and the war ended without a treaty.
the british annexed pegu, the only remaining coastal province of burma.
there was, however, a great deal of popular guerrilla resistance for three years before lower burma was brought under effective control.
the british now controlled the whole of burmas coastline and its entire seatrade.
the brunt of lighting the war was borne by indian soldiers and its expense was wholly met from indian revenues.
the third burmese war, 1885 relations between burma and britain remained peaceful for several years after the annexation of pegu.
the british, of course, continued their efforts to open up upper burma.
in particular, the british merchants and industrialists were attracted by the possibility of trade with china through burma.
there was vigorous agitation in britain and rangoon for opening the land route to western china.
finally, burma was persuaded in 1862 to sign a commercial treaty by which british merchants were permitted to settle in any part of burma and to take their vessels up the irrawaddy river to china.
but this did not satisfy the british merchants, for the burmese king retained the traditional royal monopoly of trade in many articles such as cotton, wheat, and ivory.
these merchants were impatient of restrictions on their trade and profits and began to press for stronger action against the burmese government.
many of them even demanded british conquest of upper burma.
the king was finally persuaded to abolish, all monopolies in february 1882. there are many other political and economic questions over which the burmese king and the british government clashed.
the british government humiliated the king in 1871 by annoucing that relations with him would be conducted through the viceroy of india as if he were merely a ruler of one of india and her.
neighbours 173 the indian states.
another source of friction was the attempt by the king to develop friendly relations with other european powers in 1873 a burmese mission visited france and tried to negotiate a commercial treaty which would also enable burma to import modern arms, but later under british pressure the french government refused to ratify the treaty.
king mindon died in 1878 and was succeeded by king thibaw.
the british gave shelter to rival princes and openly interfered in burmas internal affairs under the garb of preventing the alleged cruelties of king thibaw.
the british thus claimed that they had the right to protect the citizens of upper burma from tbeir own king.
what really annoyed the british was thibaws desire to pursue his fathers policy of developing commercial and political relations with france.
in 1885 he signed a purely commercial treaty with france providing for trade.
the british were intensely jealous of the growing french influence in burma.
the british merchants feared tbat the rich burmese market would be captured by their french and american rivals.
the british officials felt that an alliance with france might enable the king of upper burma to escape british tutelage or might even lead to the j founding oi a french dominion in burma and so endanger the safety of their indian empire.
moreover, the french had already emerged as a major rival of britain jn southeast asia.
in 1883, they had seized annam central vietnam, thus laying the foundation of their colony of iado china.
they were pushjng actively towards north vietnam, which they conquered between 1885 and 1889, and in the west towards thailand and burma.
the chambers of commerce in britain and the british merchants in rangoon now pressed the wilting british government for the immediate annexation of upper burma.
only a pretext for war was needed.
tim was provided by the bombayburma trading corporation.
i british concern which held a lease of the teak forests in burma.
the burmese government accused ihe company of extracting more than double the quantity of teak contracted for by bribing local officials, and demanded compensation the british government, which had already prepared a military plan for the invasion of upper burma, decided to seize this opportunity and put forward many claims on the burmese government, including the demand that the foreign relations of burma must be placed under the control of the viceroy of india.
the burmese government could not have accepted such demands without losing its independence.
its rejeclion was followed by a british invasion on 13 november 1885. this was a clear case of aggression, burma as an independent country had every right to put trade restrictions on foreigners.
this was being done daily in europe.
similarly, it had every right to establish friendly relations with france and lo import arms from anywhere.
the burmese government was unable to put up effective resistance to the british forces.
the king was incompetent, unpopular, and unprepared for war 174 modern india the country was divided by court intrigues.
a condition of near civil war prevailed.
king thibaw surrendered on 28 november 1885 and his dominions were annexed to the indian empire suon after.
the ease with which burma had been conquered proved to be deceptive.
the patriotic soldiers and officers of the army refused to surrender and vanished into the thick jungles.
from there they carried on widespread guerrilla warfare.
the people of lower burma also rose up in rebellion.
the british had to employ a 40,000 strong army for nearly five years to suppress the popular revolt.
the expenses of the war as well as of the campaign of suppression were once again thrown on the indian exchequer.
after ihe first world war, a vigorous modern nationalist movement arose in burma.
a wide campaign of boycotting british goods and administration was organised and the demand for home rule was put forward.
the burmese nationalists soon joined hands with the indian national congress.
in 1935 the british separated burma from india in the hope of weakening the burmese struggle for freedom.
the burmese nationalists opposed this step.
the burmese nationalist movement reached new heights under the leadership of u aung san during the second world war.
and, finally, burma won its independence on 4 january 1948. relations with afghanistan the british indian government fought two wars with afghanistan before its relations with the government of afghanistan were stabilized.
during the 19th century the problem of indoafghan relations got inextri india and her neighbours 175 cably mixed up with the anglorussian rivalry.
just as britain was an expanding imperial power in west, south, and east asia, russia was an expanding power in central asia and desired to extend its territorial control in west and east asia.
consequently, the two imperialisms openly clashed all over asia.
in fact, in 1855, dritain in alliance with france and turkey, fought a war with russia, known as the crimean war.
in particular, the british feared for the security of their dominion in india.
throughout the 19th century, the british rulers of india feared that russia would launch an attack on india through afghanistan and the north western frontier of india.
they therefore wanted to keep russia at a safe distance from he indian frontier.
anglorussian rivalry over central asian trade was another factor in the situation.
if russia succeeded in colonising the whole of central asia, the british chances of participating in central asian commerce in the future would disappear.
afghanistan was placed in a crucial position geographically from the british point of view.
it could serve as an advanced post outside indias frontiers for checking russias potential military threat as well as for promoting british commercial interests in central asia.
if nothing else it could become a convenient buffer between the two hostile powers.
the british policy towards afghanistan entered an active phase in 1835 when the whigs came to power in britain and lord palmerston became the foreign secretary.
dost muhammed was the ruler of afghanistan at this time.
afghan politics had been unsettled since the early yean of the 19th century.
dost muhammed had brought about partial stability but was constantly threatened by internal and external enemies.
in the north he faced internal revolts and the potential russian danger in the south one of his brothers challenged his power at kandahar in the east maharaja ranjit singh had occupied peshawar and beyond him lay the english in the west lay enemies at herat and the persian threat.
he was therefore in dire need of powerful friends.
and since he had a high regard for english strength, he desired some sort of an alliance with the government of india.
the russians tried to win him over but he refused to comply.
while discouraging the russian envoy he adopted a friendly attitude towards the british envoy, captain bums.
but he failed to get adequate terms from the british who would not offer anything more than verbal sympathy.
the british wanted to weaken and end russian influence in afghanistan but they did not want a strong afghanistan.
they wanted to keep her a weak and divided country which they could easily control.
as the government of india wrote to burns a consolidated and powerful muhammedan state on our frontier might be anything rather than safe and useful to us, and the exirting division1 of strength1 i.e.
between kabul, kandahar, and herat seemt far preferable.
this was so because the british aim was not merely to guard india against russia but also to penetrate afghanistan and central asia.
lord auckland, the indian governorgeneral, offered dost muhammed an alliance based on the subsidiary system.
dost muhammed, on the other hand, wanted genuine 176 modern india sympathy and support of the english.
he wanted to be an ally of the british indian government on the basis of complele equality and not as one of its puppets or subsidiary allies.
having tried his best to acquire british friendship and failed, he reluctantly turned towards russia.
the first afghan war auckland now decided to replace dost muhammed with a friendly i.e.
subordinate, ruler.
his gaze fell on shah shuja, who jiad been deposed from the afghan throne in 1809 and who had been living since then at ludhiana as a british pensioner.
finally, the indian government, maharaja ranjit singh, and shah shuja signed a treaty at lahore on 26 june 1838 by which the first two promised to help shah shuja capture power in afghanistan and, in return, shah shuja promised not to enter into negotiations with any foreign state without the consent of the british and the punjab govern menls.
thus without any reason or excuse the british government decided to interfere in the internal affairs of afghanistan and to commit aggression on this small neighbour.
the three allies launched an attack on afghanistan in february 1839. but ranjit singh cleverly hung back and never went beyond peshawar, the british forces had not only to take the lead but to do all the fighting.
not that there was much fighting at this stage.
most of the afghan tribes had already been won over with bribes.
kabul fell to the english on 7 august 1839, and shah shuja was immediately placed on the throne.
but shah shuja was detested and despised by he people of afghanistan, especially as he had come back with the help of foreign bayonets.
the british historian william kaye has pointed out that shah shujas entry into kabul was more like a funeral procession than the entry of a king into the capital of his restored dominions.
moreover the people resented british interference in their administration.
gradually, he patriotic, freedomloving afghans began to rise up in anger and dost muhammed and his supporters began to harass the british army of occupation.
dost muhammed was captured in november 1840 and sent to india as a prisoner, but popular anger went on increasing and more and more afghan tribes rose in revolt.
then suddenly, on 2 november 1841, an uprising bvoke out at kabul and the sturdy afghans fell upon the british forces.
on 11 december 1841, the british were compelled to sign a treaty with the afghan chiefs by which they agreed to evacuate afghanistan, and to restore dost muhammed.
but the story did not end there.
as the british forces withdrew they were attacked ail along the way.
out of 16,0 men only one reached the frontier alive, while a few others survived as prisoners.
thus the entire afghan adventure ended in total failure, it had proved to be one of the greatest disasters suffered by the british arms in india.
the british indian government now organised a new expedition.
kabul was reoccupied on 16 september 1842. but it had learnt its lesson well.
having avenged its recent defeat and humiliation, it arrived at a settlement with dost muhammed by which the british evacuated kabul and recognised him as the independent ruler of afghanistan.
india and her neighbours 177 historians have with remarkable unanimity condemned the first afghan war as imperialistic, immoral, and unwise and politically disastrous.
it cost india over one and a half crores of rupees and its army nearly 20,000 men.
moreover, afghanistan had become suspicious of, and even hostile to, the indian government.
many years were to pass before afghanistans suspicions were lulled to some extent.
policy of noninterference.
a new period of angloafghan friendship was inaugurated in 1855 with the signing of a treaty of friendship between dost muhammed and the government of india.
the two governments promised to maintain friendly and peaceful relations, to respect each others territories, and to abstain from interfering in each others internal affairs.
dost muhammed also agreed that he would be the friend of the friends of the east india company and the enemy of its enemies.
he remained loyal to this treaty during the revolt of 1857 and refused to give help to the rebels.
after 1864 this policy of noninterference was vigorously pursued by lord lawrence and his two successors.
as russia again turned its attention to central asia after its defeat in the crimean war, the british followed the policy of strengthening afghanistan as a powerful buffer.
they gave the amir of kabul aid and assistance to help him discipline his rivals internally and maintain his independence from foreign enemies.
thus, by a policy of noninterference and occassional help, the amir was prevented from aligning himself with russia.
the second afghan war the policy of noninterference did not, however, last very long.
from 1870 onwards there was a resurgence of imperialism all over the world.
the anglorussian rivalry was also intensified.
the british government was again keen on the commercial and financial penetration of central asia.
anglorussian ambitions clashed even more openly in the balkans and west asia.
the british statesmen once again thought of bringing afghanistan under direct political control so that it could serve as a base for british expansion in central asia.
moreover, british officials and public opinion were again haunted by the hysterical fear of a russian invasion of india, the brightest jewel1 in the british empire.
and so the indian government was directed by london to make afghanistan a subsidiary state whose foreign and defence policies would be definitely under british control.
sher ali, the afghan ruler or amir, was fully conscious of the russian danger to his independence and he was, therefore, quite willing to cooperate with the british in eliminating any threat from the north.
ho offered the government oflndia a defensive and offensive alliance against russia and asked it for promise of extensive military aid in case of need against internal or foreign enemies.
the indian government refused to enter into any such reciprocal and unconditional commitment.
it demanded instead the unilateral right to keep a british mission at kabul and to exercise control over afghanistans foreign relations.
when sher ali refused to comply, he was declared to be antibritish and pro russian in his 178 modern india sympathies.
lord lytton, who had come to india as governorgeneral in 1876, openly declared a tool in the hands of russia, i will never allow him to become.
such a tool it would be my duty to break before it could be used.
following in aucklands footsteps, lytton proposed to effect the gradual disintegration and weakening of the afghan power.
to force british terms on the amir a new attack on afghanistan was launched in 1878. peace came in may 1879 when sher alis son, yakub khan, signed the treaty of gandamak by which the british secured all they had desired.
they secured certain border districts, the right to keep a resident at kabul, and control over afghanistans foreign policy.
but the british success was short lived.
the national pride of the afghans had been hurt and once again they rose to defend their independence.
on 3 september 1879 the british resident, major cavagnari, and his military escort were attacked and killed by rebellious afghan troops.
afghanistan was again invaded and occupied.
but the afghans had made their point.
a change of government took place in britain in 18b0 and lytton was replaced by a new viceroy, lord ripon.
ripon rapidly reversed lyttons aggressive policy and went back to tjie policy of noninterference in the internal affairs of a strong and friendly afghanistan.
he recognized abdur rahman, a grandson of dost muhammed, as the new ruler of afghanistan.
the demand for the maintenance of a british resident in afghanistan was withdrawn.
in return abdur rahman agreed not to maintain political relations with any power except the british.
the government of india also agiced to pay the amir an annual subsidy and to come to his aid in case of foreign aggression.
thu fhe amir et afghanistan lost control of his foreign policy and, ihait ejdejrt, became a dpenden ruler.
at ahe same time, he retained iccuwplete aoritrbl jwer iris countrys internal affairs, the third angloafghan war the first world war and the russian revolution of 1917 created a new sitnation in angloafghan relations, the war gave rise to strong antibritish feeling in muslim countries, and the russian revolution inspired new antiimperialist sentiments in afghanistan as, in fact, all over the world.
the disappearance of imperial russia, moreover, removed the perpetual fear of aggression from the northern neighbour which had compelled successive afghan rulers to look to the british for support.
the afghans now demanded full independence from british control.
habibuliah, who had succeeded abdur rahman in 1901 as amir, was assassinated on 20 february 1919 and his son amamillah, the new amir, declared open war on british tndm.
peace came in 1921 when by a treaty afghanistan recovered its independence in foreigft affairs.
relations with tibet tibet lies to the north of india where the himalayan peaks separate it from india it was ruled by a buddhist religious aristocracy the lamas who had ieduced the local population to serfdom and even slavery the chief political authority was exercised by the dalai lama, who claimed to be the india and her neighbours 179 living incarnation of the power of the buddha.
the imns wanted to isolate tibet from the rest of the world however, since the beginning of the 17th century, tibet had recognised the nominal suzerainty of the chinese empire.
the chinese government also discouraged contacts with india hough a limited trade and same pilgrim tiaffic between india and tibet existeo.
the chinese empire under the manchu monarchy entered a period of decline during the 19th century.
gradually, britain, francc, russia, germany, japan, and the united states of america penetrated china commercially and politically and established indirect political control over the manchus.
the chinese people also created a powerful anli manchu and antiimperialist nationalist movement at he end of the 19th century and the manchus were overthrown in 1911. but the nationalists led by dr. sun yat sen failed to consolidate their power and china was torn by civil war during the next few years.
the result was that, weak at home, china, since he middle of the 19th century, was in no position to assert even nominal control over tibet.
the tibetan authorities slill acknowledged in theory chinese overlordship so that other foreign powers would not feel tempted to penetrate tibet.
but tibel was not aljle to maintain its complete isolation for long.
both britain and russia were keen to promote relations with tibet.
the british policy towards tibet was governed by both economic and political considerations.
economically, the british wanted to develop tndotibetan trade and to exploit its rich mineral resources.
politically, they wanted to safeguard the northern frontier of india.
it seems that the british therefore desired to exercise some sort of political control over tibet.
but up to the end of the 19th century the tibetan authorities blocked all british efforts to penetrate it.
at this tins russian ambitions also turned towards tibet.
russian influence in tibet was on the increase this the british government would not tolerate.
the very notion that the territory adjacent to indias northern border could fall under russian influence was abhorrent to it.
the government of india, under lend curzon, a vigorous empire builder, decidi to take immediate action to counter russian moves and to bring tibet under its system of protected border states.
according to some historians, the russian danger was not real and was merely used as an excuse by curzon to intervene in tibet.
in march 1904, curzon despatched a military expedition to lhasa, the capital of tibet, under francis younghusbdnd.
the virtually unarmed tibetans, who lacked modern weapons, fought back bravely but without success.
in one action at guru alone 700 of them were slaughtered.
tn august 1904, the expedition reached lhasa without coming across any russians on the way.
a treaty was signed after protonged negotiations.
tibet was to pay rs.
25 lakhs as indemnity the chumbi valley was to be occupied by the british for three years and a british trade mission was to be stationed at gyantse.
the british agreed not to interfere in tibets internal affairs.
on their part, the tibetans agreed not to admit the representatives of any foreign power into tibet.
the british achieved very little 180 modern india by the tibetan expedition.
it secured russias withdrawal from tibet, but at the cost of confirming chinese suzerainty.
world events soon compelled britain and russia to come together against their common enemygermany.
the anglo russian convention of 1907 brought about this shift.
one of the clauses of this convention laid down that neither country would seek territorial concessions in tibet or even send diplomatic representatives to lhasa.
the two countries agreed not to negotiate with tibet directly tout to do so only through china.
britain and russia reaffirmed chinas suzerainty to avoid conflict over tibet and in the hope that the decaying manchu empire .would not be able to enforce this suzerainty.
but they failed to foresee the day when a strong and independent, government would emerge in china.
relations frith sikkim the state of sikkim liesto the north of tfengal, adjacent to nepal and at the border between tief and india.
in 1835 the raja of sikkim ceded to the british territory around darjeeling in return for an afinual money grant.
friendly relations between the two were disturbed in 1849 when a minor quarrel led dalhousie to send troops into sikkim when ruler was in the end forced to cede nearly 1700 square miles of his territory to british india.
another clash occurred in 1860 when the british were engaged by the iroops of the diwan of sikkim.
by the peace treaty signed in 1861, sikkim was reduced to the status of a virtual protectorate.
the raja of sikkim expelled the diwan and his relations from sikkim, agreed to pay a fine of rs.
7,000 as well as full compensation for british losses in the war, opened his country fully to british trade, and agreed to limit the tiansit duty on goods exchanged between india and tibet via sikkim.
in 1886 fresh trouble arose when the tibetans tried to bring sikkim under their control with the complicity of its rulers who were protibet.
but the government of india would not let this happen.
it looked upon sikkim as an essential buffer for the security of indias northern frontier, particularly of darjeeling and its teagardens, it therefore carricd out military operations agajnst the tibetans in sikkim during 1888. final settlement came in 1890 with the signing of an anglochinese agreement.
the treaty rccognised that sikkim was a british protectorate over whose internal administration and foreign relations the government of india had the right to exorcise exclusive control.
relations with bhutan bhutan is a large hilly country to he east or sikkim and at indias northern border.
warren hastings established friendly relations with the ruler of bhutan after 1774 when bhutan permitted bengal to trade with tibet through its territory.
relations between the government of india and bhutan became unsatisfactory after 1815. the british now began to cast greedy eyes upon the narrow strip of territory of about 1,000 square miles at the base of bhutan hills containing a number of duars or passes.
this area would give india a well india and her neighbours 181 defined and defendable border and useful, tealands to the british planters.
ashley eden, who went to bhutan in 1863 as british envoy, described the advantages of occupyingthe duars as follows the province is one of the finest in india and under our government would in a few years become one of the wealthiest.
it ia the only place i hive icen in india in which the theory of european settlement could, in my opinion, lake a really practical fonm.
in 1841, lord auckland annexed the assam duars.
the relations between india isad bhutan .were further strained by the intermittent raids made by die bhutiyas on the bengal side of the border.
this state of jifairs lasted for nearly half a century.
in ihe end, in 1863, a brief war broke out between the two.
the fighting was utterly onesided and was settled by a treaty signed in november 1865. bhutan ceded all the bengal and assam duars in return for an annual payment of rs.
50,000. the government of india was to control bhutans defence and foreign relations, though it promised not to interfere in bhutans internal affairs.
e x e r c i s e s 1. bring out some of the basic factors which governed relations of the government of india with indias neighbours in the i9th century.
2. what were the objectives underlying british policy towards burma in the 19th century 7 how were these objectives realised  3. examine critically british indian policy towards afghanistan during the 19th century.
why did it fail repeatedly 7 4. write short notes on a anglorussian rivalry in tibet, b younghusband expedition, c indian relations with sikkim in the 19th century, d indobhutan settlement of 1865, e war with nepal, 1814. c h a p t e r x i economic impact of the british rule he british conquesthad a pronounced and profound economic impact on india.
there was hardly any aspect of the indian economy that was not changed for better or for worse during the entire period of british rule down to 1947. t 182 modern india disruption of the traditionai economy the economic policies followed by the british led to the rapid transformation of indias economy into a colonial economy whose nature and structure were determined by the needs of tbe british economy.
in this respect the british conquest differed from all previous foreign conquests.
the previous conquerors had overthrown indian political powers but had made no basic changes in the countrys economic structure they had gradually become a part of indian life, political as well as economic.
the peasant, the artisan, and the trader had continued to lead the same type of existence as before.
the basic economic pattern, that of the self sufficient village economy, had been perpetuated.
change of rulers had merely meant change in the personnel of those who appropriated the peasants surplus.
but the british conquerors were entirety different.
they totally disrupted the traditional structure of the indian economy.
moreover they never became an integral part of indian life.
they always remained foreigners in the land, exploiting indian resources and carrying away indias wealth as tribute.
the results of this subordination of the indian economy to the interests of british trade and industry were many and varied.
ruin of artisans and craftsmen there was a sudden and quick collapse of the urban handicrafts which had for centuries made indias name a byword in the markets of the entire civilised world.
this collapse was caused largely by competition with the cheaper imported machinegoods from britain.
as wc have seen earlier, the british imposed a policy of oneway free trade on india after 1813 and the invasion of british manufactures, in particular cotton textiles, immediately followed.
indian goods made with primitive techniques could not compete with goods produced on a mass scale by powerful steamoperated machines.
the ruin of indian industries, particularly rural artisan industries, proceeded even more rapidly once the railways were built.
the railways enabled british manufactures to reach, and uproot the traditional industries in the remotest villages of the country.
as the american writer, d, h. buchanan, has put it, the armour of the isolated self sufficient village was pierced by the steel rail, and its life blood ebbec away.
the cotton weaving and spinning industries were the worst hit.
silk and woollen textiles fared no better and a similar fate overtook the iron, pottery, glass, paper, metals, shipping, oilpressing, tanning and dyeing industries.
apart from the influx of foreign goods, some other factors arising out of british conquest also contributed to the ruin of indian industries.
the oppression practised by the east india company and its servants on the craftsmen of bengal during the second half of the 18th century, forcing them to sell their goods below the market price and to hire their services below the prevailing wage, compelled a large number of them to abandon their ancestral economic impact op the british rule 183 professions in the normal course indian handicrafts would have benefited from the encouragement given by the company to their export, but this oppression had an opposite effect.
the high import duties and other restrictions imposed on the import of indian goods into britain and europe during the 18th and 19th centuries, combined with the development of modern manufacturing industries in britain, led to the virtual closing of the european markets to indian manufacturers after 1820. the gradual disappearance of indian rulers and their courts who were the main customers of towr handicrafts also gave a big blow to these industries.
for instance, the production of military weapons depended entirely on the indian states.
the british purchased all their military and other government stores in britain.
moreover, indian rule is and nobles were replaced as the ruling class by british officials and military officers who patronised their own home pro ducts almost exclusively.
the british policy of exporting raw materials also injured indian handicrafts by raising the prices of raw materials like cotton and leather.
this increased the cost of handicrafts and reduccd their capacity to compete with foreign goods, the ruin of indian handicrafts was reflected in the rum of the towns and cities which were famous for their manufactures.
cities which had withstood1 the ravages of war arid plunder failed to survive british to n quesr.
dacca, surat, murshidabad and mny other populous and flou fishing industrial centres were depopulated and laid waste.
william bentmck, the governorgeneral, reported in 13435 the misery hardly find a parallel in he history of commerce.
the bones of the cottonweavera are bleaching the plains of india.
tbe tragedy was heightened by the tact that the decay of the traditional industries was not accompanied by the growth of modern machine indus tries as was the case in britain and western europe.
consequently, the mined handicraftsmen and artisans failed to find alternative employment.
the only choice open to them was to crowd into agriculture.
moreover, the british rule also upset the balance of economic life in the villages.
the gradual destruction of rural crafts broke up the union between agriculture and domestic industry in the countryside and thus contributed to the destruction of the selfsufficient village economy.
on the one hand, millions of peasants, who had supplemented their income by parttime spinning and weaving, now had to rely overwhelmingly on cultivation on the other, millions of rural artisans lost their traditional livelihood and bccame agricultural labourers or petty tenants holding tiny plots.
they added to the general pressure on land.
thus british conquest led to the deindustrialisation of the country and increased dependence of the people on agriculture.
no figures for the earlier period are available but, according to census reports, between 1901 and 1941 alone the percentage of population dependent on agriculture 184 modern india increased from 63 7 per cent to 70 per cent.
this increasing pressure on agriculture was one of ihe major causes of the extreme poverty of india under british rule.
in fact india now became an agricultural colony of manufacturing britain which needed it as a source of raw materials for its industries.
nowhere was the change more glaring than in the cotton textile industry.
while india had been for centuries the largest exporter of cotton goods in the world, it was now transformed into an importer of british cotton products and an exporter of raw cotton.
impoverishment of ibe peasantry the peasant was also progressively impoverished under british rule.
in spite of the fact that he was now free of internal wars, his material condition deteriorated and he steadily sank into poverty.
in the very beginning of british rule in bengal, the policy of clive and warren hastings of extracting the largest possible land revenue had led to such devastation that even cornwallis complained that onethird of bengal had been transformed into a jungle inhabited only by wild beasts.
nor did improvement ocur later, in both the permanently, and the temporarily settled zamindari reas, the lot of the peasants remained un, enviable.
they were left tc the mercies of the zamindars who raised rents to unbearable limits, compelled them to pay illegal dues and to perform forced labour or begat, and oppressed them in diverse other ways.
the condition of the cultivators in the ryotwari and mahalwari arcus was no better.
here the government took the place of the zamindais and levied excessive land revenue which was in the beginning fixed as high as onethird to onehalf of the produce.
heavy assessment of land was one of the main causes of the growth of poverty and the deterioration of agriculture in the 19th century.
many contemporary writers and officials noted this fact.
for instance, bishop heber wrote in 1826 neither native nor european agriculturist, i think, can thrive at ihe present rale of taxation.
half of the gross produce of the soil is demanded by government.. .
in hindustan northern india i found a general feeling among the kings officers ...that the peasantry in the companys provinces are on the whole worse off, poorer and more dispirited than the subjects of the native provinces and here in madras, where the soil is, generally speaking, poor, the difference is said to be still more marked.
the fact is, no native prince demands the rent which we do.
even though the land revenue demand went on increasing year after yearit increased from rs.
15.3 crores in 185758 to rs.
35 8 crores in 193637the proportion of the total produce taken as land revenue tended to decline as the prices rose and production increased.
no proportional increase in land revenue was made as ihe disastrous consequences of demanding extortionate revenue became obvious.
but by now the population pressure on agriculture had increased to such an extent that the lesser rever ,e demand of later years economic impact op the british rule 185 weighed on the peasants as heavily as the higher revenue demand of the earlier years of the companys administration.
the evil of high revenue demand, was made worse by the fact that the peasant got little economic return for it.
the government spent very little on improving agriculture.
it fevoted almost its entire income to meeting the needs of britishindian administ.ation, making the payments of direct and indirect tribute to england, and serving theinterests of british trade and industry.
even the maintenance of law and order tended to benefit the merchant and the moneylonder rather than the peasant.
the harmful effects of an excessive land revenue damand wtfre further heightened by the rigid mannec of its collection.
land revenue had to be paid promptly on the fied dates even if the harvest had bn below normal or had failed completely, but in bad yeans thepeaswt found it difficult to meet the revenue demand even if we had bwn b6ftdo so in giood years.
whenever the peasdnt fottodi to pay jand1 rtvfctiue tto gowktnew m modern inoiv put up his land on sale to collect the arrears of revenue.
but in most cases the peasant himself took this step and sold part of his land to meet in time the government demand.
in either case he lost his land.
more often the inability to pay revenue drove the peasant to borrow money at high rates of interest from the moneylender.
he preferred getting into debt by mortgaging his land to a money lender or to a rich peasant neighbour to losing it outright.
he was also forced to go to the money lender whenever he found it impossible to make his two ends meet.
but once in debt he found it difficult to get out of it.
the moneylender charged high, rates of interest and through cunning and deceitful measures, such as false accounting, forged signatures, and making the debtor sign for larger ampunts than he had borrowed, got the peasant deeper and deeper into debt till he parted with his land.
the moneylender was greatly helped by the new legal system and the new revenue policy.
in prebritish times, the moneylender was subordinated to the village community.
he could nofbehave in a manner totally disliked by the rest of the village.
for instance, he could not charge usurious rates of interest.
in fact, the rates of interest were fixed by usage and.
public opinion.
moreover he could not seize the land of the debtor he could at most take possession of the.
debtors personal effects like jewellery or parts of his standing crop.
by introducing transferability of land the british revenue system enabled the moneylender or the rich peasant to take possession of land.
even the benefits of peace and security established by the british through their legal system and police were primarily reaped by the moneylender in whose hands the law placed enormous power he also used the power of the purse to turn the expensive process of litigation m his favour and to make the police serve his purposes.
moreover, the literate and shrewd moneylender could easily take advantage of the ignorance and illiteracy of the peasant to twist the complicated processes of law to get favourable judicial decisions.
gradually the cultivators in the ryotwari and mahalwari areas sank deeper and deeper into debt and more and more land passed into the hands of moneylenders, merchants, rich peasants and other moneyed classes.
the process was lepeated in the zamindari areas where the tenants lost heir tenancy rights and were ejected from the land or became subtenants of the moneylendei.
the process of tausfer of land from cultivators was intensified during periods of scarcity and famines the indian peasant hardly had any savings for critical times and whenever crops failed he fell back upon the moneylender not only to pay land itvenue but also to feed himself and his family.
by the end of the 19th century the moneylender had become a major curse of the countryside and an important cause 6f the growing poverty of the rural people.
in 1911 the total rural debt was estimated at rs.300 crores.
by 1937 it amounted to rs.
1,800 crores.
the entire process became a vicious circle.
the pressure of taxation and growing poverty pushed the cultivators into debt which in turn increased then poverty.
in fact, the cultivators often failed to understand that the moneylender was an inevitable cog in the mechanism of imperialist exploitation and turned their anger against him as he appeared to be the visible cause of their impoverishment, for instance, during the revolt of 1857, wherever the peasantry rose in revolt, quite often its first target of attack was the moneylender and his account books.
such peasant actions soon became a 188 modern india common occurrence.
the growing commercialisation of agriculture also helped the money lender cummerchant to exploit the cultivator.
the poor peasant was forced to sell iiis produce just after the harvest and at whatever price he could get as he had to meet in time the demands of the government, the landlord, and the moneylender,.
this placed him at the mercy of the grain merchant, who was in a position to dictate terms and who purchased his produce at much less than the market price.
thus a large share of the benefit of the growing trade m agricultural products was reaped by the merchant, who was very often also the village moneylender.
the loss of land and the overcrowding of land caused by deindustria lisation and lack of modern industry compelled the landless peasants and ruined artisans and handicraftsmen to become either tenants of the moneylenders and zamindars by paying rackrent or agricultural labourers at starvation wages.
thus the peasantry was crushed under the triple burden of the government, the zamindar or landlord, and the moneylender.
after these three had taken their share not much was left for the cultivator and his family to subsist on.
it has been calculated that in 195051 land rent and moneylenders interest amounted to rs.
1400 crores or roughly equal to onethird of the total agricultural produce for the year.
the result was that the impoverishment of the peasantry continued as also an increase in the incidence of famines.
people died in millions whenever droughts or floods caused failure of crops and produced scarcity.
ruin of old zamindars and rise of new landlordism the first few decades of british rule witnessed the ruin of most of the old zamindars in bengal and madras.
this was particularly so with warren hastings policy of auctioning the right of revenue collection to the highest bidders, the permanent settlement of 1793 also had a similar eltcct in the beginning.
the heaviness of land revenuethe government claimed tenelevenths of the rental and the rigid law of collection, tinder which the zamindari estates were ruthlessly sold ill case of delay in payment of revenue, worked havoc for the first few years.
many of the great zamindars of bengal were utterly ruined.
by 1815 nearly half of the landed property of bengal had been transferred from the old zamindars, who had resided in the villages and who had traditions of showing some consideration to their tenants, to merchants and other moneyed classes, who usually lived in towns and who were quite ruthless in collecting to the last pie what was due from the tenant irrespective of difficult circumstances, being utterly unscrupulous and possessing little sympathy for the tenants, they began to subject the latter to rack renting and ejectment.
the permanent settlement in north madras and the ryotwan settlement in the rest of madras were equally harsh on the local zamindars.
bui the condition of the zamindars soon improved radically.
in order to enable ihe zamindars to pay the land revenue in time, the authorities increased their power over the tenants by extinguishing the traditional rights of the tenants.
the zamindars now set out to push up the rents to the utmost limit.
consequently, economic impact op the british rule 189 they rapidly grew in prosperity.
in the ryotwan areas too the system of landlordtenant relations spread gradually.
as we have seen above, more and more land passed into the hands of moneylenders, merchants, and rich peasants who usually got the land cultivated by tenants.
one reason why the indiain moneyed classes were keen to buy land and become landlords was the absence of effective outlets for investment of their capital in industry.
another process through which this landlordism spread was that of subletting.
many ownercultivators ahd occupancy tenants, having a permanent right to hold land, found it more convenient to lease out land to land hungry tenants at exorbitant rent than to cultivate it themselves.
in time, landlordism became the main feature of agrarian relations not only in the zamindari areas but also in the ryotwari areas.
a remarkable feature of the spread of landlordism was the growth of subinfeudation of intermediaries.
since the cultivating tenants were generally unprotected and the overcrowding of land led tenants to com pete with one another to acquire land, the rent of land went on increasing.
the zamindars and the new landlords found it convenient to sublet their right to collect rent to other eager persons op profitable terms.
bui as rents increased, sijb leasers of ian4 in their turt.
sublet their rights ii land.
thijs by a cfyaihpr.oeess a large number of refltreceiving intermediaries between thp actual cultivator and the government sprang up.
in s.ome oses in bengal their tjaimbejr went ashigh s fifty  this condition of the helpless cuttivativig tenaptswro had ultimately to bear the unbearable burden of maintaining this horde of superior landlords was precarious bcy.oftd imagination, tyfany of thaj were little better than slaves.
an extremely hrpnful copuce of the rise and growth of zamindars and lanijlords was the political role they played during indias struggle for independence along with the princes of protected states they became the chief political supporters ol the foreign rulers and opposed the rising national movement.
realising that they owed their existence to british rule, they tried hard to maintain and perpetuate it.
stagnation and deterioration of agriculture as a result of overcrowding of agriculture, excessive land revenue demand, growth oflandlordism, increasing indebtedness, and the growing impoverishment of the cultivators, indian agriculture began to stagnate and even deteriorate resulting in extremely low yields per acre.
overcrowding of agriculture and increase in subinfeudation led to subdivision and fragmentation of land into small holdings most of which could not maintain their cultivators.
the extreme poverty of the overwhelming majority of peasants left them without any resources with which to improve agriculture by using better cattle and seeds, more manure and fertilizers, and improved techniques of production.
nor did the cultivator, rackrented by both the government and the landlord, have any incentive to do so.
after all the land he cultivated was rarely ins properly and the bulk of the benefit which agricultural improvements would bring was likely to be reaped by the horde of absentee landlords and money 190 modern india lenders.
subdivision and fragmentation of land also made it difficult to effect improvements.
in england and other european countries the rich landlords often invested capital in land to increase its productivity with a view to share in the increased income.
but in india the absentee landlords, both old and new, performed no useful function.
they were mere rentreceivers who had often no roots in land and who took no personal interest in it beyond collecting rent they found, it possible, and therefore preferred, to increase their income by further squeezing their tenants rather than by making productive investments m their lands.
the government could have helped in improving and modernising agriculture.
but the government refused to recognise any such responsibility a characteristic of the financial system of british india was that, while the main burden of taxation fell on the shoulders of the peasant, the government spent only a very small part of it on him.
an example of this neglect of the pfcasant and agriculture was the stepmotherly treatment meted, put to public works and agricultural improvement.
while the government of india had spent by 1905 over 360 crores of rupees on the .railways which were demanded by british business interests, it spent m the same period less than 50 crores of rupees on irrigation whioh would have benefited millions of indian cultivators.
even so, irrigation was1 the only field in which the government took some steps forward.
at a time when agriculture all ovei the world was being modernised and revolutionised, indian agriculture was technologically stagnating, hardly any modern machinery was used.
what was worse was that even ordinary implements were centuries old.
for example, in 951, theie were only 930,000 iron ploughs m use while wooden ploughs numbered 31.
8 million.
the use of inorganic fertilizers was virtually unknown, while a large part of animal manure, i e , cowdung, night soil, and cattle bones, was wasted in 192223, only 1.9 per cent of all cropped land was under improved seeds.
by 193839, this percentage had goneup to only 11 furthermore, agricultural education was completely neglected.
in 1939 there were only six agriculture colleges with 1,306 students.
there was not a single agriculture college in bengal, bihar, orissa, and sind.
nor could peasants make improvements through selfstudy.
there was hardly any spread of primary education or even literacy m the rural areas.
development of modern industries an important development in the second half of the 19th century was the establishment of largescale machinebased industries in india.
the machine age in india started when cotton textile, jute and coal mining industries were started in the 1850s.
the first textile mill was started in bombay by cowasjee nanabhoy in 1853, and the first jute mill in rishra bengal in 1855 these industries expanded slowly but continuously, in 1879 there were 56 cotton textile mills in india employing nearly 43,000 persons.
in 1882 there were 20 jute mills, most of them in bengal employing nearly 20,000 persons.
by 1905, india had 206 cotton mills economic impact op the british rule 191 employing nearly 196,000 persons.
in 1901 there were over 36 jute mills employing nearly 115,000 persons, the coal mining industry employed nearly one lakh persons m 1906. other mechanical industries which developed during the second half of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th centuries were cotton gins and presses, rice, flour and timber mills, leather tanneries, woollen textiles, paper and sugar mills, iron and steel works, and such mineral industries as salt, mica and saltpetre.
cement, paper, matches, sugar and glass industries developed during the 1930s.
bat all these industries had a very stunted growth.
most of the modern indian industries were owned or controlled by british capital.
foreign capitalists were attracted to indian industry by the prospects of high profits.
labour was extremely cheap raw materials were readily and cheaply available and for many goods, india and its neighbours provided a ready market.
for many indian products, such as tea, jute, and manganese, there was a ready demand the world over.
on the other hand, profitable investment opportunities at home were getting fewer.
at the same time, the colonial government and officials were willing to provide all help and show all favours.
foreign capital easily overwhelmed indian capital in many of the industries only in the cotton textile industry did the indians have a large share from the beginning, and in the 1930s, the sugai industry was developed by the indians.
tndian capitalists had also to struggle from the beginning against the power of british managing agencies and british banks.
to enter a field of entei prise, indian businessmen had to bend before british managing agencies dominating that field.
in many cases even indianowned companies were contioiled by foreign owued or controlled managing agencies.
indians also found it difficult to get credit from banks most of which were dominated by british financiers.
even when they could get loans they had to pay high mteiest rates while foreigners could borrow on much easier terms.
of course, gradually indians began to develop their own banks and insurance companies.
in 1914 foreign banks held over 70 per cent of all bank deposits m india by 1937 iheir share had decreased to 57 per cent british enterprise in india also took advantage of its close connection with british suppliers of machinery and equipment, shipping, insurance companies, marketing agencies, government officials, and political leadeis to maintain its dominant position in indian economic life.
moreover, the government followed a conscious policy of favouring foreign capital as against indian capital.
the railway policy of the government also discnminated against indian enterprise jailway freight rates encouiaged foreign imports at the cost of trade in domestic products.
it was more difficult and costlier to distribute indian goods than to distribute imported goods.
another serious weakness of indian industrial effort was the almost complete absence of heavy or capital goods industries, without which there can be no rapid and independent development of industries.
india had no big plants to produce iron and steel or to manufacture maclunery a few petty repair workshops represented engineering industries and a few iron and brass foundaries 192 modern india represented metallurgical industries.
the first steel in india was produced only in 1913. thus india lacked such basic industries as steel, metallurgy, machine, chemical, and oil.
india also lagged behind in the development of electric power.
apart from machinebased industries, the 19th century also witnessed the growth of plantation industries such as indigo, tea, and coffee.
they were almost exclusively european in ownership indigo was used as a dye in textile manufacture.
indigo manufacture was introduced in india at the end of the 18th century and flourished in bengal and bihar.
indigo planters gained notoriety for their oppression over the peasants who were compelled by them to cultivate indigo.
this oppression was vividly portrayed by the famous bengali wnter dinbandhu mitra in his play nenl darpan in 1860. the invention of a synthetic dye gave a big blow to the indigo industry and it gradually declined.
the tea industry developed in assam, bengal, southern india, and the hills of himachal pradesh after 1850. being foreignowned, it was helped by the government with grants of rentfree land and other facilities.
in time use of tea spread all over india and it also became an important item of export.
coffee plantations developed during this period in south india.
the plantation and other foreignowned industries were hardly of much advantage to the indian people.
their salary profits went out of the country.
a large part of their bill was spent on foreigners.
they purchased most of their equipment abroad.
most of their technical staff was foreign.
most of their products were sold in foreign markets and the foreign exchange so earned was utilised by britain.
the only advantage that indians got out of these industries was the creation of unskilled jobs.
most of the workers in these enterprises were, however, extremely low paid, and they worked under extremely harsh conditions for very long hours.
moreover, conditions of near slavery prevailed in the plantations.
on the whole, industrial progress in india was exceedingly slow and painful.
it was mostly confined to cotton and jute industries and tea plantations in the 19th century, and to sugar and cement in the i930s.
as late as 1946, cotton and jute textiles accounted for 40 per cent of all workers employed in faotories.
in terms of production as well as employment, the modern industrial development of india was paltry compared wih the economic development of other countries or with indias economic needs.
it did not, in fact, compensate even for the displacement of the indigenous handicrafts it had little effect on the problems of poverty and oyercrowding of land.
the paltriness of indian industrialisation is brought out by the fact that out of a population of 357 millions in 1951 only about 2.3 millions were employed in modern industrial enterprises.
furthermore, the decay and decline of the urban and rural handicraft industries continued unabated after 1858. the indian planning commission has calculated that the number of persons engaged in processing and manufacturing fell from 10.3 millions in 1901 to 8 8 millions in 1951 even though the population increased by nearly 40 per cent.
the government made no effort to protect, rehabilitate, reorganise, and modernise economic impact op the british rule 193 these old indigenous industries.
motftover, even the modern industries had to develop without government help and often in opposition to british poliey.
british manufacturers looked upon indian textile and other industries as their rivals and put pressure on the government of india not to encourage but rather t5 actively, discourage industrial development in india.
thus british policy artiicially restricted and slowed down the growth of indian industries.
furthermore, indian industries, still in ft period of infancy, needed protection they developed at a time when britain, france, germany, and the united states had already established powerful industries and could not therefore compete with them.
in fact, all other countries, including britain, had protected their infant industries by imposing heavy customs duties on the imports of foreign manufactures.
but india was not a free country.
its policies were determined in britain and in the interests of british industrialists who forced a policy of free trade upon their colony.
for the same reason the government of india refused to give any financial or other help to the newly founded indian industries as was being done at the time by the governments of europe and japan for their own infant industries.
it would not even make adequate arrangements for technical education which remained extremely backward until 195p and further contributed to industrial backwardness.
tn 1939, there were only 7 engineering colleges with 2,217 students in the country.
many indian projects, for example, those concerning the construction of ships, locomotives, cars, and aeroplanes, could not get started because of the governments refusal to give any help.
finally, in the 1920s and i930s, under the pressure of the rising nationalist movement and the indian capitalist class the government of india was forced to grant some tariff protection to indian industries.
but, once again, the government discriminated against indianowned industries.
the indianowned industries such as cement, iron and steel, and glass were denied protection or given inadequate protection.
on the other hand, foreign dominated industries, such as the match industry, were given the protection they desired.
moreover, british imports were given special privileges under the system of imperial preferences even though indians protested vehemently.
another feature of indian industrial development was that it was extremely lop sided regionally.
indian industries were concentrated only in a few regions and citiesof the country.
large parts of the country remained totally underdeveloped.
this unequal regional economic development not only led to wide regional disparities in income but also affected the level of national integration.
it made the task of creating a unified indian nation more difficult.
an important social consequence of .even the limited industrial development of the country was the birth and growth of two new social classes in indian society the industrial capitalist class and the modem working class.
these two classes were entirely new in indian history because modern mines, industries, and means of transport were new.
even though these classes formed a very bmall part of the indian population, they represented new technology, a new system of economic organisation, new social relations, new ideas, and a new outlook.
they were not weighed down by the burden of old traditions, customs, and styles of life.
most of all, they possessed an allindia outlook.
moreover, both of them 194 modern india were vitally interested in the industrial development of the country.
their economic and political importance and roles were therefore out of all proportion to their numbers.
poverty and famines a major characteristic of british rule in india, and the net result of british economic policies, was the prevalence of extreme poverty among its people.
while historians disagree on the question whether india was getting poorer or not under british rule, there is no disagreement on the fact that throughout the period of british rule most indians always lived on the verge of starvation.
as time passed, they found it more and more difficult to find employment or a living, british economic exploitation, the decay of indigenous industries, the failure of modern industries to replace them, high taxation, the drain of wealth to britain, and a backward agrarian structure leading lo the stagnation of agriculture and the exploitation of the poor peasants by the zamindars, landlords, princes, money lenders.
merchants, and the state gradually reduced the indian people to extreme poverty and prevented them from progressing.
indias colonial economy stagnated at a low economic level.
the poverty of the people found its culmination in a series of famines which ravaged all parts of india in the second half of the 19th century.
the first of these famines occurred in western u.p.
in 186061 and cost over 2 lakh lives.
in 1865 66 a famine engulfed orissa, bengal, bihar, and madras and took a toll of nearly 20 lakh lives, orissa alone losing 10 lakh people.
more than 14 lakh persons died in the famine of 186870 in western up,, bombay, and the punjab.
many states in rajputana, anjother affected area, lost l4th to 13rd of their population.
perhaps the worst famine in indian history till then occurred in 187678 in madras, mysore, hyderabad, maharashtra, western u. p, and the punjab.
maharashtra lost 8 lakh people, madras nearly 35 lakhs, mysore nearly 20 per cent of its population, and u. p. over 12 lakhs.
drought led to a countrywide famine in 189697 and then again in 1899 1900. the famine of 189697 affected over 9.5 crore people of whom nearly 45 lakhs died.
the famine of 18991900 followed quickly and caused widespread distress.
in spite of official efforts to save lives through provision of famine relief, over 25 lakh people died.
apart from these major famines, many other local famines and scarcities occurred.
william digby, a british writer, has calculated that, in all, over 28,825,0 people died during famines from 1854 to 1901. another famine in 1943 carried away nearly 3 million people in bengal.
these famines and the high tosses of life in them indicate the extent to which poverty and starvation had taken root in india.
many english officials in india recognised the grim reality of indias poverty during the 19th century.
for example, charles elliott, a member of the governor generals council, remarked i do not hesitate to say that half the agricultural population do not fcaow from one years end to another what it is to have a full meal.
economic impact op the british rule 195 and william hunter, the compiler of the imperial gazetteer, conceded that forty million of the people of india habitually go through life on insufficient food.
the situation became still worse in the 20th century.
the quantity of food available to an indian declined by as much as 29 per cent in the 30 years between 1911 and 1941. there were many other indications of indias economic backwardness and impoverishment.
colin clark, a famous authority on national income, has calculated that during the period 192534, india and china had the lowest per capita incomes in the world.
the income of an englishman was 5 times that of an indian.
similarly, average life expectancy of an indian during the 1930s was only 32 years in spite of the tremendous progress that modern medical sciences and sanitation had made.
in most of the western european and north american countries, the average age was already over 60 years.
indias economic backwardness and poverty were not due to the niggardliness of nature.
they were manmade.
the natural resources of india were abundant and capable of yielding, if properly utilised, a high degree of prosperity to the people.
but, as a result of foreign rule and exploitation, and of a backward agrarian and industrial economic structure, in fact as the total outcome of its historical and social development india presented the paradox of a poor people jiving in a rich country.
ex er c ises 1. how was india transformed into an economic colony under british rule 1 2. examine critically the impact of british policies on the indian peasant.
how did it lead to the spread of landlordism 3. discuss the main features of the development of modem industries in india.
4. write short notes on a the ruin of old zamindars b stagnation in agriculture t poverty and famines in modern india.
he second half of the 19th century witnessed the full flowering c h a p t e r xu growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 of national political consciousness and the growth of an organised national movement in india.
in december 1885 was born the indian national congress under whose leadership indians waged a prolonged and courageous struggle for independence from foreign rule, which india finally won on 15 august 1947. consequence of foreign domination basically, modem indian nationalism arose to meet the challenge of foreign domination.
the very conditions of british rule helped the growth of national sentiment among the indian people.
it was british rule and its direct and indirect consequences which provided the material, moral and intellectual conditions for the development of a national movement in india.
the root of the matter lay in the clash of the interests of the indian people with british interests in india.
the british had conquered india to promote their own interests and they ruled it primarily with that purpose in view, often subordinating indian welfare to british gain.
the indians, realised gradually that their interests were being saenfied to those of lancashire manufacturers and other dominant british interests.
they now began to recognise the evils of foreign rule.
many intelligent indians saw that many of these evils could have been avoided and over come if indian and not foreign interests had guided the policies of the indian government.
the foundations of the indian nationalist movement lay in the fact that increasingly british rule became the major cause of indias economic backwardness.
it became the major barrier to indias further economic, social, cultural, intellectual, and political development.
moreover, this fact began to be recognised by an increasingly larger number of indians.
every class, every section of indian society gradually discovered that its interests were suffering at the hands of the foreign rulers.
the peasant saw that the government took away a large part of his produce as land growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 197 revenue that the government and its machinerythe police, the courts, the officialsfavoured and protected the zamindars and landlords, who rackrented him, and the merchants and moneylenders, who cheated and exploited him in diverse ways and who took away his land from him.
whenever the peasant struggled against landlord, moneylender oppression, the police and the army suppressed him in tbe name of law and order.
the artisan or the handicraftsman saw that the foreign regime had helped foreign competition to ruin him and had done nothing to rehabilitate him.
later, in the 20th century, the worker in modern factories, mines, and plantations found that, in spite of lip sympathy, the government sided with the capitalists, especially the foreign capitalists.
whenever he tried to organise trade unions and to improve his lot through strikes, demonstrations, and other struggles, government machinery was freely used against him.
moreover, he soon realised that the growing unemployment could be checked only by rapid industrialisation which only an independent government could bring about.
all these three classes of indian societythe peasants, the artisans, the workers, constituting the overwhelming majority of indian population discovered that they had no political rights or powers, and that virtually nothing was being done for their intellectual or cultural improvement.
education did not percolate down to them.
there were hardly any schools in villages and the few that were there were poorly run.
the doors of higher education were barred to them in practice.
moreover, many of them belonged to the lower castes and had still to bear social and economic oppression by the upper castes.
other sections of indian society were no less dissatisfied.
the rising intelligentsiathe educated indiansused their newly acquired modern knowledge to understand the sad economic and political condition of their country.
those who had earlier, as in 1857, supportd british rule in the hope that, though alien, it would modernise and industrialise the country were gradually disappointed.
economically, they had hoped that british capitalism would help develop indias productive forces as it had done at home.
instead, they found that british policies in india, guided by the british capitalists at home, were keeping the country economically backward or underdeveloped and checking the development of its productive forces.
in fact, economic exploitation by britain was increasing indias poverty.
they began to complain of the extreme costliness of the indian administration, of the excessive burden of taxation especially on the pea santry, of the destruction of indias indigenous industries, of official attempts to check the growth of modern industries through a probritish tariff policy, of the neglect of nationbuilding and welfare activities such as education, irrigation, sanitation, and health services.
in brief, they could see that britain was reducing india to the statue of an economic colony, a source of raw materials for british industries, a market for british manufactures, and a field for the investment of british capital.
consequently, they began to realise that so long as imperialist control of the indian economy continued, it would not be possible to develop it, especially so far as industrialisation was involved.
198 modern india politically, educated indians found that the british had abandoned all previous pretensions of guiding india towards selfgovernment.
most of the british officials and political leaders openly declared that the british were in india to stay.
moreover, instead of increasing the freedom of speech, of th press, and of the person, the government increasingly restricted them.
british officials and writers declared indians to be unfit for democracy or selfgovernment.
in the field of culture, the rulers were increasing taking a negative and even hostile attitude towards higher education and the spread of modern ideas.
moreover, the indian intelligentsia suffered from growing unemployment.
the few indians who were educated were not able to find employment and even those who did find jobs discovered that most of the better paid jobs were reserved for the english middle and upper classes, who looked upon india as a special pasture for their sons.
thus, educated indians found that the economic and cultural development of the country and its freedom from foreign control alone could provide them with better employment opportunities.
the rising indian capitalist class was slow in developing a national political consciousness.
but it too gradually saw that it was suffering at the hands of imperialism.
its growth was severely checked by the government trade, tariff, taxation, and transport policies.
as a new and weak class it needed active government help to counterbalance many of its weaknesses.
but no such help was given.
instead, the government and its bureaucracy favoured foreign capitalists who came to india with their vast resources and appropriated the limited industrial field.
the indian capitalists were particularly opposed to the strong competition from foreign capitalists.
in the 1940s many of the indian industrialists demanded that all british investments in india be repatriated.
and, in 1945, m.a.
master, president of the indian merchants chamber warned india would prefer to go without industrial development rather than allow the creation of new east india companies in this country, which would not only militate against her economio independence but would also effectively prevent her from acquiring her political freedom.
the indian capitalists too therefore realised that there existed a contradiction between imperialism and their own independent growth, and that only a national government would create conditions for the rapid development of indian trade and industries.
growth of new indiathb nationalist movement 18 581905 199 as we have seen in an earlier chapter, the zamindars, landlords, and princes were the only section of indian society whose interests coincided with those of the foreign rulers and who, therefore, on the whole supported foreign rule to the end.
but even from these classes, many individuals joined the national movement.
in the prevailing nationalist atmosphere, patriotism made an appeal to many.
moreover, policies of racial dominance and discrimination apalled and aroused every thinking and selfrespecting indian to whichever class he might belong.
most of all, the foreign character of the british regime in itself produced a natio nalist reaction, since foreign domination invariably generates patriotic sentiments in the hearts of a subject people.
to sum up, it was as a result of the intrinsic nature of foreign imperialism and of its harmful impact on the lives cf the indian people that a powerful antiimperialist movement gradually arose and developed in india.
this movement was a national movement because it united people from different classes and sections of the society who sank their mutual differences to unite against the common enemy.
administrative and economic unification of the country nationalist sentiments grew easily among the people because india was unified and welded into a nation during the 19th and 20th centuries.
the british had gradually introduced a uniform and modern system of government throughout the country and thus unified it administratively.
the destruction of the rural and local selfsufficient economy and the introduction of modem trade and industries on an allindia scale had increasingly made indias economic life a single whole and interlinked the economic fac of people living in different parts of the country.
for example, if famine or scarcity occurred in one part of india, prices and availability of foodstuffs were affected in all other parts of the country too.
this was not usually the case before the 19th century.
similarly, the products of a factory in bombay were sold far north in lahore or peshawar.
the lives of the workers and capitalists in madras, bombay, or calcutta were closely linked with the lives of the countless peasants in rural india.
furthermore, introduction of the railways, telegraphs, and unified postal system had brought the different parts of the country together and promoted mutual contact among the people, especially among the leaders.
mere again, the very existence of foreign rule acted as a unifying factor.
all over the country people saw that they were suffering at the lands of the same enemybritish rule.
thus antiimperialist feeling was itself a factor in the unification of the country and the emergence of a common national outlook.
western thought and education as a result of the spread of modern western education and thought during the 19th century, a large number of indians imbibed a modern rational, secular, democratic, and nationalist political outlook.
they also began to study, admire, and emulate the contemporary nationalist movements of european nations.
rousseau, paine, john stuart mill, and other western thinkers became their political guides, while mazzini, garibaldi, and irish nationalist leaders became their political heroes.
these educated indians were the first to fee the humiliation of foreign subjection.
by becoming modem in their thinking, they also acquired the ability 200 modern india to study, the evil effects of foreign rale.
they frere inspired by the dieam of a modern, strong, prosperous, and united india.
in course of.time, the best among them became the leaders and organisers of the national movement.
it should be clearly understood that it was not the modern educational system that created the national movement which was the product of the conflict of interests between britain and india.
that system only enabled the educated indians to imbibe western thought and thus to assume the leadership of the national movement and to give it a democratic and modern direction.
in fact, in the schools and colleges, the authorities tried to inculcate notions of docility and servility to foreign rule.
nationalist ideas were a part of the general spread of modern ideas.
in other asian countries such as china and indonesia, and all over africfe, modern and nationalist ideas spread even though modern schools and colleges existed on a much smaller scale.
modem education also created a certain uniformity and community of outlook and interests among t h e educated indians.
the english language played an important role in this respect.
it became the medium for the spread of modern ideas.
it also became the medium of communication and exchange of ideai between educaled indians from different linguistic regions of the country.
this point should not, however, be overemphasised.
after all the educated indians of the past also possessed a common language in t h e form of sanskrit and later on persian as well.
tslor was english essential for the acquisition of modern scientific knowledge and thought.
other countries of asia such as japan and china were able to do so through translations into their own languages.
in fact english soon became a barrier to the spread of modern knowledge among the common people.
it also acted as a wall separating the educated urban people from the common people, especially in the rural areas.
consequently, it came about that modern ideas spread faster and deeper in many countries where they were propagated through indigenous languages than in india where emphasis on english confined them to a narrow urban section.
this fact was fully recognised by the indian political leaders.
from dadabhai naoroji, sayyid ahmed khan, and justice ranade to tilak and gandhiji, they agitated.for a bigger role for the indian languages in the educational system.
in fact, so far as the common people were concerned, the spread of modern ideas occurred through the developing indian languages, the growing literature in them, and most of all the popular indian language press.
more important than a common language was the fact that modern education introduced identical courses of study all over the country.
the books prescribed in the new schools and colleges tended to give the students a common political and economic outlook.
consequently, educated indians tended to have common views, feelings, aspirations and ideals.
the sole of the press and literature the chief instrument through which the nationalistminded indians spread the message of patriotism and modern economic, social and political ideas and created an allindia consciousness was the press.
large numbers of nationalist newspapers made their appearance during the second half of the 19th century.
in their columns, the official policies were constantly criticised the indian point of view was put forward the people were asked to unite and work for national growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 201 welfare and ideas of selfgovernment, democracy, industrialisation, etc., were popularised among the people.
the press also enabled nationalist workers living m different parts of the country to exchange views with one another.
some of the prominent nationalist newspapers of the period were the hindu patriot, the amrita bazar patrika, the indian mirror, the bengalee, the som prakash and the sanjivani in bengal the rast goftar, the native opinion, the indu prakash, the mahratta, and the kesari in bombay the hindut the swadcsamitran, the andhra prakasika, and the kerala palrika in madras the advocate, the hindustani, and the azad m u. p. and the tribune, the akhbariam, and the kofhinoor in the punjab national literature in the form of novels, essays, and patriotic poetry also played an important role in arousing national consciousness.
ban kim chandra chatterjee and rabindranath tagore in bengali, lakshmt nath bezbarua in assamese vishnu shastri chiplunkar in marathi, sub ramanya bharali in tamil bharatendu harishchandrd in hindi and altaf husain hall in urdu were some of the prominent nationalist writers of the period.
rediscovery of indias past many indians bad fallen so low as to have lost confidence in their own capacity for selfgovernment.
moreover, many british officials and writers of the time constantly advanced the thesis that indians had never been able to rule themselves in the past, that hindus and muslims had always fought one another, that indians were destined to be ruled by foreigners, that their religion and social life were degraded and uncivilised making them unfit for democracy or even selfgovernment.
many of the nationalist leaders tried to arouse the selfconfidence and selfrespect qf the people by countering this propaganda.
they pointed to the cultural heritage of india with pride and referred the critics to the political achievements of rulers like asoka, chandragupta vikramaditya, and akbar.
in this task they were helped and encouraged by the work of european and indian scholars in rediscovering our national heritage in art, architecture, literature, philosophy, science, and politics.
unfortunately, some of the nationalists went to the other extreme and began to glorify indias past uncritically ignoring its weakness and backwardness.
great harm was done, in particular, by the tendency to look up only to the heritage of ancient india while ignoring the equally great achievements of the medieval period.
this encouraged the growth of communal sentiments among the hindus and the counter tendency among the muslims of looking to the history of the arabs and the turks for cultural and historical inspiration.
moreover, in meeting the challenge of cultural imperialism of the west, many indians tended to ignore the fact that in many respects the people of india were culturally backward, a false sense of pride and smugness was produced which tended to prevent indians from looking critically at their society.
this weakened the struggle against social and cultural backwardness, and led many indians to turn away from healthy and fresh tendencies and ideas from other peoples, racial arrogance of the rulers 202 modern india an important though secondary factor in the growth of national sentiments in india was the tone of racial superiority adopted by many englishmen in their dealings with indians.
many englishmen openly insulted even educated indians and sometimes even assaulted them, a particularly odious and frequent form taken by racial arrogance was the failure of justice whenever an englishman was involved in a dispute with an indian.
indian newspapers often published instances in which an englishmen had hit and killed an indian but escaped very lightly, often with a mere fine.
this was not only because of conscious partiality by the judges and administrators but even more because of racial prejudice.
as g.o.
trevelyan pointed out in 1864 the testimony of a single one of our countrymen has more weight with the court than that of any number of hindoos, a circumstance which puts a terrible instrument of power into the hands of an unscrupulous and grasping englishman.
racial arrogance branded all indians irrespective of their caste, religion, province, or class with the badge of inferiority.
they were kept out of exclusively european clubs and were often not permitted to travel in the .same compartment in a train with the european passengers, this made them conscious of national humiliation, and led them to think of themselves as one people when facing englishmen.
immediate factors by the 1870s it was evident that indian nationalism had gathered enough strength and momentum to appear as a major force on the indian political scene.
however, it required the reactionary regime of lord lytton to give it visible form and the controversy around the ilbert bill to make it take up an organised form.
during lyttons viceroyalty from 187680 most of the import duties on british textile imports were removed to please the textile manufacturers of britain.
this action was interpreted by indians as proof of the british desire to ruin the small but growing textile industry of india.
it created a wave of anger in the country and led to widespread nationalist agitation.
the second war against afghanistan aroused vehement agitation against the heavy cost of this imperialist war which the indian treasury was made to bear.
the arms act of 1878, which disarmed the people, appeared to them as an effort to emasculate the entire nation.
the vernacular press act of 1878 was condemned by the politically conscious indians as an attempt to suppress the growing nationalist criticism of the alien government the holding of the imperial durbar at delhi in 1877 at a time when the country was suffering from a terrible famine led people to believe that their rulers cared very little even for their lives.
in 1878, the government announced new regulations reducing the maximum age limit for sitting in the indian civil service examination from 21 years to 19. already indian students had found it difficult to compete with english boys since the examination was conducted in england and in english.
the new regulations further reduced their chances of entering the civil service.
the indians now realised that the british had no intention of relaxing their neartotal monopoly of the higher grades of services in the administration.
growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 203 thus, lyttons viceroyalty helped intensify discontent against foreign rule.
we may quote in this respect the words of surendianath baneijea, one of the founders of the national movement the reactionary administration of lord lytton had aroused the public from its attitude of indifference and had given a stimulus to public life.
in the evolution of political progress, bad rulers are often a blessing in disguise.
they help to stir a community into life, a result that years of agitation wguld perhaps have foiled to achieve.
if lytton fed the smouldering discontent against british rule, the spark was provided by the ilbert bill controversy.
in 1883, ripon, who succeeded lytton as the viceroy, tried to pass a law to enable indian district magistrates and session judges to try europeans in criminal cases.
it was a very meagre effort to remove a glaring instance of racial discrimination, under the existing law even indian members of the indian civil service were not authorised to try europeans in their courts.
the europeans in india organised a vehement agitation against this bill which came to be known after ilbert, the law member.
they poured abuse on indians and their culture and character.
they declared that even the most highly educated among the indians were unfit to try a european.
some of them even organised a conspiracy to kidnap the viceroy and deport him to england.
in the end, the government of india bowed before the europeans and amended the bill to meet their criticism.
the indians were horrified at the racial bitterness displayed by the critics of the bill.
they also became more fully conscious of the degradation to which foreign rule had reduced thgm.
they organised an allindia campaign in favour of the bill.
and, most of all, they learnt the useful lesson that to get their demands accepted by the government they too must prganise themselves on a national scale and agitate continuously and unitedly.
predecessors of the indian national congress the indian national congress, founded in december 1885, was the first organised expression of the indian national movement on an all india scale.
it had, however, many predecessors.
as we have seen in an earlier chapter, raja rammohun roy was the first indian leader to start an agitation for political reforms in india.
the earliest public association in modern india was the landholders societyan association of the landlords of bengal, bihar, and orissa, founded in 1837 with the purpose of promoting the class interests of the landlords.
then, in 1843, was organised the bengal british indian society to protect and promote general public interests.
these two organisations merged in 1s5i to form the rritish india association.
similarly, the madras native association and the bombay association were established in 1852 similar, though lesser known clubs and associations, such as the scientific society founded by sayyid ahmad khan, were established in different towns and parts of the country.
all these associations were dominated by wealthy and aristocratic elements called in those days .prominent persons and were provincial or local in character.
they worked for reform of 204 modern india administration, association of indians with the administration, and spread of education, and sent long petitions, putting forward indian demands, to the british parliament.
the period after 1858 witnessed a gradual widening of the gulf between the educated indians and the british indian administration.
as the educated indians studied the character of british rule and its consequences for the indians, they became more and more critical of british policies in india, the discontent gradually found expression in political activity.
the existing associations no longer satisfied the politicallyconscious indians.
in 1866, dadabhai naoroji organised the east india association in london to discuss the indian question and to influence british public men to promote indian welfare.
later he organised branches of the association in prominent indian cities.
born in 1825, dadabhaj devoted his entire life to the national movement and soon came to be known as the grand old man of india.
he was also indias first economic thinker.
in his writings on economics he showed that the basic cause of indias poverty lay in the british exploitation of india and the drain of its wealth.
dadabhai was honoured by being thrice elected president of the indian national congress.
in fact he was the first of the long line of popular nationalist leaders of india whose very name stirred the hearts of the people.
justice ranade and others organised the poona sarvajanik sabha in the 1870y the madras mahajan sabha was started in 1881 and the bombay presidency dadabhai ncorojl with annie bewnt and others courtesy ifehn manorial museum and library growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 205 association in 1885. these organisations were mainly devoted to criticism of important administrative and legislative measures, the poona sarvajanik sabha brought out a quarterly journal under the guidance of justice ranade, this journal became the intellectual guide of new india particularly on economic questions.
the most important of the precongress nationalist organisations was the indian association of calcutta.
the younger nationalists of bengal had been gradually getting discontented with the conservative and prolandlord policies of the british india association.
they wanted sustained political agitation on issues of wider public interest.
they found a leader in surendranath baneijea who was a brilliant writer and orator.
he was unjustly turned out of the indian civil service as ms superiors could not.
tolerate the presence of an independentminded indian in the ranks of this service.
he began his public career in 1875 by delivering brilliant addresses on nationalist topics to the students of calcutta.
led by surendranath and anandamohan bose, the younger nationalists of bengal founded the indian association in july 1876. the indian association set before itself the aims of creating a strong public opinion in the country on political questions and the unification of the indian people on a common political programme.
in order to attract large numbers of people to its banner, it fixed a low membership fee for the poorer classes.
the first major issue it took up for agitation ws the reform of the civil service regulations and the raising of the age limit for its examination, surendranath banerjea toured different parts of the country during 187778 in an effort to create an allindia public opinion on this question.
the indian association also carried out agitation against the arms act and he vernacular press act and in favour of protection of the tenants from oppression by the zamindars.
during 188385 it organised popular demonstrations of thousands of peasants to get the rent bill changed in favour of the tenants, it also agitated for better conditions of work for the workers in the englishowned tea plantations where conditions of nearslavery prevailed.
many branches of the association were opened in the towns and villages of bengal and also in many towns outside bengal.
the time was now ripe for the formation of an allindia political organisation of the nationalists who felt the need to unite politically against the common enemy foreign rule and exploitation.
the existing organisations had served a useful purpose but they were narrow in their scope and functioning.
they dealt mostly with local questions and their membership and leadership were confined to a few people belonging to a single city or province.
even the indian association had not succeeded in becoming an allindian body.
the indian association sponsored an allindia national conference at calcutta in december 1883. this conference was attended by several leaders from outside bengal.
it adopted a programme very siihilar to the one adopted by the indian national congress with which it merged growth of new indiathe nationalist ijovembnt 18581905 206 in 1886. it did not, however, succeed in becoming a representative body of political workers and leaders all over the country.
the indian national congress many indians had been planning to form an allindia organisation of nationalist political workers.
but the credit for giving the idea a concrete and final shape goes to a.o.
hume, a retired english civil servant.
he got in touch with prominent indian leaders and organised with their cooperation the first session of the indian national congress at bombay in december 1885. it was presided over by w.c. bonnerjee and atten ded by 72 delegates.
the aims of the national congress were declared to be the promotion of friendly relations between nationalist political workers from different parts of the country, development and consolidation of the feeling of national unity irrespective of caste, religion, or province, formulation of popular demands and their presentation before the government, and, most important of all, the training and organisation of public opinion in the country.
one of the main aims of hiune in helping to found the national congress was to provide an outleta safety valveto the increasing popular discontent against british rule.
already in 1879, wasudeo balwant phadke, a clerk in the commissariat department, had gathered a band of ramoshi peasants and started an armed uprising in maharashtra.
though this crude and ill prepared attempt was easily crushed, it was a portent of events to come.
hume as well as other english officials and statesmen were afraid that the educated indians might provide leadership to the masses and organise a powerful rebellion against the foreign government.
as hume put it a safety valve for the escape of great and growing forces generated by our own action was urgentlyneeded.
he believed that the national congress would provide a peaceful and constitutional outlet to the discontent among the educated indians and would thus help to avoid the outbreak of a popular revolt.
the safety valve theory is, however, a small part of the truth.
more than anything else, the national congress represented the urge of the politically conscious indians to set up a national organisation to work for their political and economic advancement.
we have already seen above that a national movement was already growing in the country as a result of the working of powerful forces.
no one man or group of men can be given credit for creating this movement.
even humes motives were mixed ones.
he was also moved by motives nobler than those of the safety valve.
he possessed a sincere love for india and its poor cultivators.
in any case, the indian leaders, who cooperated with hume in starting this national congress, were patriotic men of high character who willingly accepted humes help as they did not want to arouse official growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 207 btdroddln tytbjl hostility towards their efforts at so early a stage of political activity.
thus with the foundation of the national congress in 1885, the struggle for indias freedom from foreign rule was launched in a small but organised manner.
the national movement was to grow and the country and its people were to know no rest till freedom was won.
surendranath baaerjea and many other leaders of bengal had not attended the first session of the national congress as they were busy with the second national conference at calcutta.
in 1886 they merged their forces with those of the national congress whose second session met in calcutta in december 1886 under the presidentship of dadabhai naoroji.
from this session the national congress became the whole countrys congress.
its delegates, numbering 436, were elected by different local organisations and groups.
hereafter, the national congress met every year in december, in a different part of the country each time the number of its delegates soon increased to thousands.
its delegates consisted mostly of lawyers, journalists, traders, industrialists, teachers, and landlords.
in 1890, kadambini ganguli, the first woman graduate of calcutta university, addressed the congress session.
this was symbolic of the fact that indias struggle for freedom would raise indian women from the degraded position to which they had been reduced for centuries past.
the indian national congress was not the only channel through which the stream of nationalism flowed.
provincial conferences, provincial and local associations, and nationalist newspapers were the other prominent organs of the growing nationalist movement.
the press, in particular, was a powerful factor in developing nationalist opinion and the nationalist movement.
some of the great presidents of the national con gress during its early years were dadabhai naoroji, badruddin tyabji, pherozeshah mehta, p.ananda charlu, surendranath baneijea, ramesh chandra dfltt, ananda mohan bose, and gopal krishna gokhale.
other prominent leaders of the congress and the national movement during this period were mahadev govind ranade, bal 208 modern india gangadhar tilak, the brothers sisir kumar and motilal ghosh, madari mohan malaviya, g. subramaniya iyer, c. vijayaraghavachariar, anddinshaw e. wacha.
the programme of the indian national movement during its early phase 1885 1905 can be studied under various heads.
constitutional reforms the early nationalists wanted a larger share in the government of their own country and made an appeal to the principle of democracy, but they did not ask for the .immediate fulfilment of their goal.
their immediate demands were extremely moderate.
they hoped to win freedom through gradual steps.
they were also extremely cautious, lest the government suppress their activities.
from 1885 to 1892 they demanded the expansion and reform of the legislative councils.
they demanded membership of the councils for elected representatives of the people and also an increase m the powers of the councils.
the british government was forced by their agitation to pass the indian councils act of 1892, by this act the number of members of the imperial legislative council as well as of the provincial councils was increased.
some of these members could be elected indirectly by indians, but the officials majority remained.
the councils were also given the right to discuss the annual budgets though they could not vote on them the nationalists were totally dissatisfied with the act of 1892 and declared it to be a hoax.
they demanded a larger share for indians in the councils as also wider powers for them.
in particular, they demanded indian control over the public purse and raised the slogan that had earlier become the national cry of the american people during their war of independence no taxation without representation.
by the beginning of the 20th century, the nationalist leaders advanced further and put forward the claim for swarajya or selfgovernment within the british empire on the model of selfgoverning colonies like australia and canada.
this demand was made front the congress platform by gokhale in 1905 and by dadabhai naoroji in 1906. economic reforms in the economic field, the early nationalists complained of indias growing poverty and economic backwardness and the failure of modem industry and agriculture to grow and they put the blame on the policies of the british rulers.
thus dadabhai naoroji declared as early as 1881 that british rule was an everlasting, increasing, and every day increasing foreign invasion that , was utterly, though gradually, destroying the country.
the nationalists blamed the british for the destruction of indias indigenous industries the chief remedy they suggested for the removal of indias poverty was the rapid development of modern industries.
they wanted the government to promote modern industries through tariff protection and direct government aid.
they populaused he idea of swadeshi or the use of indian goods and the boycott of british goods as a means of promoting indian industries.
for example, students in poona and in other towns of growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 209 maharashtra publicly burnt foreign clolhcs in 1896 as part of the larger swadeshi campaign.
the nationalists complained that indias wealth was being drained to england, and demanded that this drain be stopped.
they carried on persistent agitation for the reduction of land revenue in order to lighter the burden of taxation on the peasant.
they also agitated tor improvement in the conditions of work of the plantation labourers.
they declared high taxation to be one of the causes of indias poverty and demanded abolition of the salt tax and reduction of land revenue.
they condemned the high military expenditure of the government of india and demanded its reduction.
as time passed more and more nationalists came to the conclusion that economic exploitation and impoverishment of the country and the perpetuation of its economic backwardness by foreign imperialism more than outweighed some of the beneficial aspects of the alien rule.
thus, regarding the benefits of security of life and property, dadabhai naoroji remarked the romance is that there is security of life and property in india the reality is that there is no such thing.
there is security of life and property in one sense or wayi.e., the people are secure from any violence from each other or from native despots ...... but from englands own grasp there is no security of property at all and, as a consequence, no security for life indias property is not secure.
what is secure, and well secure, is that england is perfectly safe and secure, and does so with perfect security, to carry away from india, and to eat up in india, her property at the present rate of 30,000,000 or 40,000,000 a year.
.1 therefore venture to submit that india does not enjoy security of her property and life .. .to millions in india life is simply halffeeding, or starvation, or famine and disease.
with regard to law and order, dadabhai said there is an indian saying.
fray strike on the back, but dont strike on he belly.
under the native despot the people keep and enjoy what they produce, though at times they suffer some violence on the back under the british indian despot the man is at peace, there is no violence his substance is drained away, unseen, peaceably and subtlyhe starves in peace and perishes in peace, with law and order 1 administrative and other reforms the most important administrative reform the indians desired at this time was indianisation of the higher grades of administrative services.
they put forward this demand on economic, political and moral grounds.
growth of new indiathb nationalist movement 18 581905 210 economically, the european monopoly of the higher services was harmful on two grounds, a europeans were paid at very high rates and this made indian administration very costlyindians of similar qualifications could be employed on lower salaries b europeans sent out of india a large part of their salaries and their pensions were paid m england.
this added to the drain of wealth from india politically, the nationalists hoped that the indianisation of these services would make the administration moie responsive to indian needs the moral aspect, of the question was stated by gopa krishna gokhalc in 1897 the excessive costliness of ihe foreign agency is not, however, its only evil, there is a moral evil which, if anything, js even greater a kind of dwarfing or stunting of the indian race is going on under the present system.
we must live all the days of our life in an atmosphere of infeiiority, and the tallest of us musi bend.. the full height of which our manhood is capable of rising can never be reached by us under the present system the moral elevation which every self governing people feel cannot be felt by us our administrative and military talents must gradually disappear, owing to sheer disuse, till at last our lot, as hewers of wood and drawers of water in our own country, is stereotyped the nationalists demanded separation of the judicial from executive powers.
they opposed the curtailment of the powers of the juries.
they opposed the official policy of disarming the people and asked the government to trust the people and grant them the right to bear arms and thus defend themselves and their country in times of need.
they urged the government to undertake and develop welfare activities of the state.
they laid a great deal of emphasis on the spread of primary education among the masses.
they also demanded greater facilities for technical and higher education.
they urged the development of agricultural banks to save the peasant from the clutches of the moneylender.
they wanted the government to undertake a large scale programme of extension of irrigation for the development of agriculture and to save the country from famines.
they demanded extension of medical and health facilities and improvement of the police system to make it honest, efficient, and popular the nationalist leaders also spoke up in defence of indian workers who had been compelled by poverty to migrate to foreign countries su h as south africa, malaya, mauritius, the west indies and british guiana in search of employment.
in many of these foreign lands they were subjected to severe oppression and racial discrimination.
this was particularly true of south africa where mohandas karamchand gandhi was leading a popular struggle in defence of the basic human rights of the indians.
defence of civil rights the early nationalists fully recognised the value of the freedoms of speech and the press and opposed all attempts to curtail them.
in fact, the struggle for these freedoms became an integral part of the nationalist struggle for freedom.
in 1897 the bombay government arrested b.g.
tilak and several other leaders and tried them for spreading disaffection against the government through their speeches and growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 211 writings, they were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.
at the same time two poona leaders, the natu brothers, were deported without trial.
the entire country protested against this attack on the liberties of the people.
tilak, hitherto known largely in maharashtra, became overnight an allindia leader.
the amrita bazar pnlrika wrote there is scarcely a home in this vast country, where mr. tilak is not npw the subject of melancholy talk and where his imprisonment is not considered as a domestic calamity.
tilaks arrest, in fact, galvanised the country and marked the beginning of a new phase of the nationalist movement.
methods of political work the indian national movement up to 1905 was dominated by leaders who have often been described as moderate nationalists or moderates.
the political methods of the moderates can be summed up briefly as constitutional agitation within the four walls of the law, and slow, orderly political progress.
they believed that if public opinion was created and organised and popular demands presented to the authorities through petitions, meetings, resolutions, and speeches, the authorities would concede these demands gradually and step by step.
their political work had, therefore, a twopronged direction.. firstly, to build up a strong public opinion in india to arouse the political consciousness and national spirit of the people, and to educate and unite them on political questions.
basically, even the resolutions and petitions of the national congress were directed towards this goal.
secondly, to persuade the british government to introduce reforms along directions laid down by the nationalists.
the moderate nationalists believed that the british people and parliament wanted to be just to india but that they did not know the true state of affairs there.
therefore, next to educating indian public opinion, the moderate nationalists worked to educate british public opinion.
for this purpose, they carried on active propaganda in britain.
deputations of leading indians were sent to britain to propagate the indian view.
in 1889, a british committee of the indian national congress was founded.
in 1890 this committee started a journal called india, padabhai naoroji spent a major part of his life and income in england in popularising indias case among its people.
a student of the indian national movement sometimes, gets confused when he reads loud professions of loyalty to british rule by prominent moderate leaders.
these professions do not at all mean that they were not genuine patriots or that they were cowardly men.
they genuinely believed that the continuation of indias political connection with britain ws in the interests of india at that stage of history.
they, therefore, planned not to expel the british but to transform british rule to approximate to national rule.
later, when they took note of the evils of british rule and the failure of the government to accept nationalist demands for reform, many of them stopped talking of loyalty to british rule and started demanding selfgovernment for india.
moreover, many of them were moderates because they felt that the time was not yet ripe to throw a direct challenge to the foreign rulers.
we sfcoyld also remember that not all the nationalists of the period belonged to the moderate trend.
some of them had from the beginning no faith in the good 212 modern india intentions of the british.
they believed in depending on political action by, and the strength of, the indian people themselves.
they advocated a, fighting political and economic programme.
tilak and numerous other leaders and newspaper editors represented this trend.
these leaders later came to be known as extremists or radical nationalists.
their work and outlook will be discussed in the next chapter, attitude of the government the british authorities were from the beginning hostile to the rising nationalist movement and had become suspicious of the national congress.
british officials from dufferin downwards branded the nationalist leaders as disloyal babus, seditious brahmins and violent villains.
but in the beginning this hostility was not openly expressed it was perhaps hoped that humes leadership would make the national movement and its organ, the national congress, harmless to british rule.
in december 1886, the viceroy even invited tjae delegates to the national congress to a garden party.
but it soon became, apparent that the national congress would pot become a tool in the hands of the authorities and that it was gradually becoming a focus of indian nationalism.
british officials, now began to openly criticise and condemn the national congress and other nationalist, spokesmen.
in 1887, dufferin attacked the national congressin a public speech and ridiculed it as representing only a microscopic minority of the people.
in 1906, lord curzon awjoyjoped tq tjjie secretary pf stte tht the congress is tottering to it fall, and on qf my gret ambitions, while in india,,.assistit to a peaceful demise.
the british authorities lso.
pushed further the policy of jiyvte md theyopragegayyid ahmed khan, raja stays wid other proritiph individuals to start an ferities faid, however, in shpeirffig  growth, of patiosm moveme evaluation of tbe early national movement according to some critics, the nationalist movement and the national congress did not achieve much success in their early phase.
very few of the reforms for which the nationalists agitated were introduced by tbe government.
critics also point out that tbe national movement during these years had no roots among themasses.
there is a great deal oc.
truth in this criticism.
but the critics are not quite correct in declaring the early national movement a failure.
it succeeded in creating a wide national awakening, in arousing among the people the feeling that they belonged to one common nationthe indian nation it trained people in the art of political work, popularised among them the ideas of democracy and nationalism, propagated among them a modern outlook and exposed before them the evil results of british rule.
most of all, it made people recognise the economic content and character of british imperial ismthat britain was making india a supplier of raw materials, a market for british manufacture, and a field for investment of british capital.
it evolved a common political and economic programme around which the indian people could gather and wage political struggles later on.
it growth of new indiathe nationalist movement 18581905 213 established the political truth that india must be ruled in the interests of the indians.
it made the issue of nationalism a dominant one in indian life.
while its weaknesses were to be removed by the succeeding generations, its achievements were to serve as a base for a more vigorous national movement in later years.
ex er c ises 1 in what way was the national movement the result of the clash of the interests of the indian people with the british interests in india  2. critically examine the important factors which led to the rise of modern nationalism in india in the second half of the 19th century.
bring out clearly the role of foreign domination, administrative and economic unification of the country, western thought and education, the press, cultural heritage, racial arrogance of the rulers, and the administrations of lytton and ripon.
3. what did the national movement in its early phase 18851905 try to achieve why is this phase described as the moderate phase what were the achievements of the moderate leaders 4. write short notes on  a impact of the rediscovery of the pat on nationalism and com munalism, b ilbert bill, c dadabhai naoroji, d the indian association, e foundation of the indian national congress f governments attitude towards the national congress.
chapter xiii growth of new india religious and social reform after 1858 he rising tide of nationalism and democracy which led to the struggle for freedom, also found expression in movements to reform and democratise the social institutions and religious outlook of the indian people.
many indians realised that social and religious reformation was an essential condition for the allround development of the country on modem lines and for the growth of national unity and solidarity.
growth of nationalist sentiments, emergence of new economic forces, spread of education, impact of modern western ideas and culture, and increased awareness of the world not only heightened the consciousness of the backwardness and degeneration of indian society but further strengthened the resolve to reform.
keshub chandra sen, for example, said what we see around us today is a fallen nationa nation whose primitive great ness lies buried in ruins.
its national literature and science, its theology and philosphy, its industry and commerce, its social prosperity and domestic simplicity and sweetness, are almost numbered with he things that were.
as we survey the mournful and dismal scene of desolationspiritual, social and intellectualwhich spreads around us, we in vain try to recognise theremthe land of kalidasthe land of poetry, of science, and of civilization similarly, swami vivekananda described the condition of indian people in the following words moving about here and there emaciated figures of young and old in tattered rags, whose faces bear deepcut lines of the despair and poverty of hundreds of years cows, bullocks, buffaloes common everywhereaye, the same melancholy look in their eyes, the same feeble physique, on the wayside, refuse and dirtthis is our present day india wornout huts by the very side of palaces, piles of refuse in the near proximity of temples, the sannyasin clad with only a little loin cloth, walking by he gorgeously dressed, the pitiful gaze of lustreless eyes of the hunger stricken at t he wel lfed an d the ampl yprovid edthis is ou r native land devas tation by violent plague and cholera malaria eating into the very vitals of the nation starvation and semistarvation as second nature deathlike famine often dancing its tragic dance, ..a conglomeration of three hundred million souls, resembling men only in appearancecrushed out of life by being downtrodden t 216 modern india by their own people and foreign nations...withoutanyhope, without any past, without any future...of a malicious nature befitting a slave, to whom the property of their fellowman is unbearable...licking the dust of the feet of the strong, withal dealing a deathblow to those who are weakfull of ugly, diabolical superstitions which come naturally to those who are weak, and hopeless of the future without any standard of morality as their backbonethree hundred millions of souls such as these are swarming on tbe body of india, like so many worms on a rotten, stinking carcassthis is the picture concerning us, which naturally presents itself to the english official thus, after 1858, the earlier reforming tendency was broadened.
the work of earlier reformers, like raja rammohun roy and pandit vidyasagar, was carried further by major movements of religious and social reform.
religious reform filled with the desire to adapt their society to the requirements of the modern world of science, democracy, and nationalism, and determined to let no obstacles stand in the way, thoughtful indians set out to reform their traditional religions.
while trying to remain true to the foundations of their religions, they remodelled them to suit the new needs of the indian people.
brahmo samaj the brahmo tradition of raja rammohun roy was carried forward after 1843 by devendranath tagore, who also repudiated the doctrine that the vedic scriputures were infallible, and after 1866 by keshub chandra sen. the brahmo samaj made an effort to reform hindu religion by removing abuses, by basing it on the worship of one god and on the teachings of the vedas and upanishads, and by incorporating the best aspects of modern western thought.
most of all it based itself on humaij reason which was to be the ultimate1 criterion for deciding what was worthwhile and what was useless in the past or present religious principles and practices.
for that reason, the brahmo samaj denied the need for a priestly class for interpreting religious writings.
every individual had the right and the capacity to decide with ihe help of his own intellect what was right and whaf was wrong in a religious book or principle.
thus the brahnxos were basically opposed to idolatry ,and superstitious practices and rituals,in fact the entire brahmanical system they could worship oi god without the mediation of the priets.
the btahiflos were also great social reformers.
they actively opposed the csste system find chirdjparriagg and supported the general uplift of women, inehidmg widow remarriage, and the spread of modem education to mep and women,  thewhrrto samaj was wetfketied by wternal dissentiftns idthe teeond htf of tte 9th century.
moreover its influence was eonfihl fjtostly to urban educated groups.
yet it had a decisive influence on the intellectual, social, cultural, and political life of bengal and the rest of india in the 19th and 20th centuries.
religious reform in maharashtra religious reform was begun in bombay in 1840 by the parmahans mandali growth of india after 1858 21 7 which aimed at fighting idolatry and the caste system.
perhaps the earliest religious reformer in western india was gopal hari deshmukh, known popularly as lokahitwadi, who wrote in marathi, made powerful rationalist attacks on hindu orthodoxy, and preached religious and social equality.
for example, he wrote in the 1840s the priests are vefy unholy because they repeat things without understanding their meaning and profanely reduce knowledge to such repetition.
the pandits arc worse than priests because they are more ignorant and also are haughty.... who are the brahmins and in what respects to do they differ from us have they twenty hands and do we lack something in us.
when such questions are now asked the brahmins should give up their foolish concepts they must accept that all men are equal and every body has a right to acquire knowledge.
later the prarthana samaj was started with the aim of reforming hindu religious thought and practice in the light f modern knowledge.
it preached the worship of one god and tried to free religion of caste orthodoxy and priestly domination.
two of its great leaders were r.g.
bhandar kar, the famous sanskrit scholar and historian, and mahadev gov in d ranade 18421901. it was powerfully influenced by the brahmo samaj.
its activities also spread to south india as a result of the efforts of the telugu reformer, viresalingam.
one of the greatest rationalist thinkers of modern india, gopal ganesh agarkar, also lived and worked in maharashtra at this time.
agarkar was an advocate of the power of human reason.
he sharply criticised any blind dependence on tradition or false glorification of indias past.
hamaltrinhna and vivekananda ramakrishna parmhansa 18341386 was a saintly person who sought religious salvation in the traditional ways of renunciation, meditation, and devotion aofcro in his search fot religious truth or the realisation of god he lived with mystics of other faiths, muslims and christians.
he again and again emphasised that there were many roads to god and salvation and that service of man was service of god, for man was theembodi ment of gsd.
it was his great disciple, swami vivekananda 18631902, who popularised his religious message and who tried to put it in a form that would suit the needs of contemporary indian society.
above all, vivekananda 218 modern india vivekananda stressed social action.
knowledge unaccompanied by action in ihe actual world in which we lived was useless, he said.
he too, like his guru, proclaimed the essential oneness of all religions and condemned any narrowness in religious matters.
thus, he wrote in 1898, for our own motherland a junction of the two great systems, hinduism and islam... is the only hope.
at the , same time, he was convinced of the superior approach of the indian philosophical tradition.
he himself subscribed to vedanta which he declared to be a fully rational system.
vivekananda criticised indians for haying lost touch vith the rest of the .
world and become stagnant and mummified.
he wrote the fact of our isolation from all other nations of the world is the cause of our degeneration and its only remedy is getting back into the current of the rest of the world.
motion is the sign of life.
vivekananda condemned the caste system and the current hindu emphasis on rituals, ceremonies, and superstitions, and urged the people to imbibe the spirit of liberty, equality, and freethinking.
thus he blting ly remarked there is a danger of our religion getting into the kitchen.
we are neither vedan tists, most of us now, nor pauramcs, nor tantrics.
we are just dont touchists.
our religion is in the kitchen.
our god is in the cookingpot, and our religion  is dont touch me, i am holy.
if this goes oh for another century, everyone  otus will be in a lunatic asylum.
i regarding liberty of thought, hesaid liberty in thought and action is the only condition of life, growth and well being where it does not exist, the man, the race, and the nation must go down.
growth of india after 1858 219 like his gum, vivekananda was also a great humanist.
shocked by  the poverty, misery and suffering of the common people of the country, he wrote the only god in whom i believe, thesum total of all souls, and above all, my god the wicked, my god the afflicted, my god the poor of all races.
to the educated indians, he said so long as the millions live in hunger and ignorance, i hold everyman a traitor, who having been educated at their expense, pays not the least heed to them.
in 1896, vivekananda founded the ramakrishana mission to carry on humanitarian relief and social work.
the mission had many branches in different parts of the country and carried on social service by opening schools, hospitals and dispensaries, orphanages, libraries, etc.
it thus laid emphasis not on personal salvation but on social good or social service.
swami dayanand and arya samaj the arya samaj undertook the task of reforming hindu religion m north india.
it was founded in 1875 by swami dayanand saraswati 18241883. swami dayanand believed that selfish and ignorant priests had perverted hindu religion with the aid of the puranas which he said were full of false teachings for hts own inspiration, swami dayanand went to the vedas which he regarded as infallible, i being the inspired word of god, and as the fount of all knowledge.
he rejected all later religious thought if it conflicted with the vedas.
this total dependence on the vedas .
dayanand , and their inf his teachings an prthodox colouring, for infallibility meant that human reason was not to be the final deeding factor.
however, hjs approach hid,.a, rationalist aspect, because .the vedas, though revealed, were to be interpreted, by himself and others, 220 modern india who were human beings.
thus individual reason was the decisive factor.
he believed that every person had the right of direct access to god.
moreover, instead of supporting hindu orthodoxy, he attacked it and led a revolt against it.
the teachings he derived from his own interpretation of the vedas were surprisingly similar to the religious and social reforms that other indian reformers were advocating.
he was opposed to idolatry, ritual, and priesthood and particularly to the prevalent caste practices and popular hinduism as preached by brahmins.
he also directed attention towards the problems of men as they lived in this real world and away from the traditional belief in the other world.
he also favoured the study of western sciences.
interestingly enough, swami dayanand had met and had had discussions with keshub chandra sen, vidyasagar, justice ranade, gopal hari deshmukh and other modem religious and social reformers.
in fact, the idea of the arya samaj with its sunday meeting resembled the practices of brahmo samaj and the prarthana samaj in this respect.
some of swami dayanands followers later started a network of schools and colleges in the country to impart education on western lines.
lala hansraj played a leading part in this effort.
on the other hand, in 1902, swami shradhananda started the gurukul near hardwar to propagate the more traditional ideals of education.
the arya samajists were vigorous advocates of social reform and worked actively to improve the condition of women, and to spread education among them.
they fought untouchability and the rigidities of the hereditary caste system.
they were thus advocates of social equality and promo i ted social solidarity and consolidation.
they also inculcated a spirit of selfrespect and selfreliance among the people.
at the same time, one of the arya samajs objectives was to prevent the conversion of hindus to other religions.
this led it to start a crusade against other religions.
this crusade became a contributory factor in the growth of communal ism in india in the 20th century.
while the arya samajs reformist work tended to unite people its religious work tended, though perhaps uoconsci l ously, to divide the growing national unity among hindus, muslims, i parsis, sikhs, and .christians.
it was not seen clearly that in india national unity had to be secular and above religion so that it would embrace people of all religions.
j theosophical society the theosophical society was founded in the united states by madam  h. p. blavatsky and colonel h.s.
olcott, who later came to india and founded the headquarters ofthe society at adyar near madras in 1886.  , the theosophist movement soon grew in india as a result of the leadership given to.it by mn.
annie besant who had come to india in 1893. the theosophists advocated the revival and strengthening of the ancient religions of hinduism, zoroastrianism, and buddhism.
they recognised the doctrine of the transmigration of the soyl.
they also preached the universal brotherhood of man.
growth of india after 1858 22 1 as religious revivalists the theosophists were not very successful.
but they made a peculiar contribution to developments in modern india.
ii was a movement led by westerners who glorified indian religions and philosophical tradition.
this helped iidans recover their selfconfidence, even though it tended to give them a sense of false pride in their past greatness.
one of mrs. besants many achievements in india was the establishment of the central hindu school at benaras which was later developed by ftladan mohan malaviya into the benaras hindu university.
sayyid ahmad khan and the aligarh school movements for religious reform were late in emerging among the muslims.
the muslim upper classes had tended to avoid contact with western education and culture, and it was mainly after the revolt of 1857 that modern ideas of religious reform began to appear.
a beginning in this direction was made when the muhammedan literary society was founded at calcutta in 1863. this society promoted discussion of religious, social, and political questions in the light of modern ideas and encouraged upper and middle class muslims to take to western education.
the most important reformer among the muslims was sayyid ahmad khan 18171898. hewas tremendously impressed by modern scientific thought and worked all his life to reconcile it with islam.
this he did, first of all, by declaring that the quran alone was the authoritative work for islam and all other islamic writings were secondary.
even the quran he interpreted in the light of contemporary rationalism and science.
in his view any interpretation of the quran that conflicted with human reason, science or nature was in reality a misinterpretation.
all his life he struggled against blind obedience to tradition, dependence on custom, ignorance and irrationalism.
he urged the people to develop a critical approach and freedom of thought.
so long as freedom of thought is not developed, there can be no civilized life, he declared.
he also warned against fanaticism, narrowmindedness, and exclusiveness, and urged students and others to be broadminded and tolerant.
a closed mind, he said, was the hallmark of social and intellectual backwardness.
praising the study of world classics, he remarked the student will learn to appreciate the temper with which great minds approach the consideration of great questions, he will discover that truth is manyblded, that it is not identical or merely coextensive with individual opinion and that world is a good deal wider than his own sect, society, or class.
sayyid ahmad khan believed that the religious and social life of the muslims could be improved only by imbibing modern western scientific knowledge and culture.
therefore promotion of modern education remained his first task throughout his life.
as an official he founded schools in many towns and had many western books translated into urdu.
in 1875 he founded at aligarh the muhammed an anglooriental college as a centre for spreading western sciences and culture.
later, this college grew into the aligarh muslim university.
sayyid ahmad khan was a great believer in religious toleration.
he believed 222 modern india that all religions had a certain underlying unity which could be called practical morality.
believing that a persons religion was his or her private affair, he roundly condemned any sign of religious bigotry in personal relations.
he was also opposed to communal friction.
appealing to hindus and muslims to unite, he said in 1883 now botluof us live on the air of india, drink the ho waters of the ganga and jumna.
we both feed upon he products of the indian spil.
wc are together in life and death, living in india both of us have changed out blood, the colour of ovir bodies has become the same, our features have become similar the musstmans have adopted numerous hindu customs, the hindus have accepted many muslim traits of conduct, we became so fused that we developed the new language of urdu, which was neither our language nor that of the hindus.
therefore, if we except that part of our lives which belongs to god, then undoubtedly in consideration of the fact that we both belong to the same country, we are a nation, and the progress and welfare of the country, and both of us, depend on our unity, mutual sympathy, and love, while our mutual disagreement, obstinacy and opposition and illfeeling are sure to destroy us.
moreover, hindus, parsis and christians had freely contributed to the funds of his college whose doors were also open to all indians.
for example, in 1898, there were 64 hindu and 285 muslim students in the college.
out of the seven indian teacherstwo were hindu, one of them being professor of sanskrit.
however, towards the end of his life, lie began to talk of hindu domination to prevent his followers from joining the rising national movement.
this was unfortunate, though basically, he was not a communalist.
he only wanted the backwardness of the muslim middle and upper classes to go.
his politics were the result of his.
firm belief that immediate political progress was not possible because the british government could not be easily dislodged.
on the other hand, any hostility by the officials might prove dangerous to the educational effort which he saw as the need of the hour.
he believed that only when indians hard become as modern in their thinking and actions as the english were could they hope to succesfully challenge foreign rule.
he therefore advised all indians and particularly the educationally backward muslims to remain aloof from politics for some time to come.
the time for politics he said had not yet come.
in fact, he had become so committed to his college and the cause of education that he was willing to sacrifice all other interests to them.
consequently, to prevent the orthodox muslims from opposing his college, he virtually gave up his agitation in favour of religious reform.
for the same reason, he would not do anything to offend the government and, on the other hand, encouraged communalism and separatism.
this was, of course, a serious political error, which was to have harmful consequences in later years.
moreover, some of his followers deviated from his broadmindedness and tended later to glorify islam and its past while criticising other religions.
sayyid ahmads reformist zeal also embraced the social sphere.
he urged muslims to give up medieval customs and ways of thought and behaviour.
in particular he wrote in favour of raising the womens status in society and advocated removal of purdah and spread of education among women.
he also growth of india after 1858 223 condemned the customs of polygamy and easy divorce.
sayyid ahmad khan was helped by a band of loyal followers who are collectively described as the aligarh school.
chiragh ali, the urdu poet altaf husain hali, nazir ahmad, and maulana shibli nomani were some of the other distinguished leaders of the aligarh school.
muhammad iqbal one of the greatest poets of modern india, muhammad iqbal 1876 1938 also profoundly influenced through his poetry the philosophical and religious outlook of the younger generation of muslims as well as of hindus.
like swami vivekananda, he emphasised the need for constant change and ceaseless activity and condemned resignation, contemplation, and quiet contentment.
he urged the adoption of a dynamic outlook that would help change the world.
he was basically a humanist.
in fact he raised human action to the status of a prime virtue.
man should not submit to nature or powers that be, he said, but should control this world through constant activity.
nothing was more sinful in his eyes than the passive acceptance of things as they were.
condemning ritualism, asceticism, and otherwordly attitude, he urged men to work for and achieve happiness in this world of the living.
in his earlier poetry, he extolled patriotism, though later he encouraged muslim separatism.
religious reform among the parsis religious reform, was begun among the parsis in bombay in the middle of the 19th century.
in 1851, the rehnumi mazdayasan sabha or religious reform association was started by jnaoroji furdonji, dadabhai1 naoroji, s.s. bengalee, and others.
it campaigned against the entrenched orthodoxy in the religious field.and initiated the modernisation, of parsi social customs regarding the education of women, marriage and the social position of women in general.
in course of time, the parsis became socially themost westernised section of indian society.
religious reform among the sikhs religious reform among the sikhs was begun at the end of the 19th century when the khalsa college was started at amritsar.
but the reform effort gained momentum after 1920 when the akah movement rose in the punjab.
the main aim of the akalis was to purify the management of the gurudwctras or sikh shrines, these gurudwaras had been heavily endowed with land and money by devout sikhs, but they had come to be managed autocratically by corrupt and selfish mahanis.
the sikh masses led by the akalis started in 1921 a powerful satyagraha against the mahanis and the government which came to their aid.
the akalis soon forced the government to pass a new sikh gurudwaras act in 1922 which was later amended in 1925. sometimes with the aid of this act, but often through direct action, the sikhs gradually turned out of the gurudwaras the corrupt mahants, even though hundreds of lives had to be sacrificed in the process.
224 modern india apart from the reform movements and individual reformers discussed above, there were numerous other similar movements and individuals during the 19th and 20th centuries.
the religious reform movements of modern times had an underlying unity most of them were based on the twin doctrines of reason rationalism and humanism, though they also sometimes tended to appeal to faith and ancient authority to bolster their appeal.
moreover, it was to the rising middle classes, whose aspirations they expressed, that they appealed most.
they tried to free from antiintellectual religious dogmas and blind faith the human intellects capacity to think and reason.
they opposed the ritualistic, superstitious, irrational, and obscuranist elements in indian religions.
many of them abandoned, though with varying degrees, the pnnciple of authority in religion and evaluated truth in any religion or its holy books by its conformity to logic, reason, or science.
swami vivekananda said.
is religion to justify itself by the discoveries of reason through which every science justifies itself are he same methods of investigation which apply to the sciences and knowledge outside, to be applied to the science of religion in my opinion, this must be so, and i am also of opinion that the sooner this is done the better.
some of these religious reformers appealed to tradition and claimed that they were merely reviving the pure doctrines, beliefs, and practices of the past.
but, in fact, the past could not be revived.
often there was growth of india after 1858 225 no agreed picture of the past.
the problems that an appeal to the past often created were posed aa follows by justice ranade, who had himself often asked people to revive the best traditions of the past what shall we revive shall we revive the old habits of our people when the most sacred of our castes indulged in all the abominations, as we now understand them, of animal food and intoxicating drink shall we revive the twelve forms of sons, or eight forms of marriage, which included capture, and recognised mixed and illegitimate intercourse... .shall we revive the hecatombs of animals sacrificed from years end to year end, in which even humanbeings were not spared as propitiatory offerings to god.
...shall we revive the sail, and infanticide custom and he came to the conclusion that the society as a living organism is constantly changing and can never go back to the past.
the dead and the buried or burnt are dead, buried, and burnt once for all, and the dead past cannot, therefore, be revived, he wrote.
every reformer, who appealed to the past, so interpreted it as to make it appear to agree with the reforms he was suggesting.
often the reforms and the outlook were new, only their justification was based on an appeal to the past.
many of the ideas which conflicted with the modern scientific knowledge were usually declared to be a later accretion or misinterpretation.
and since the orthodox could not accept this view, the religious reformers came into conflict with the orthodox sections and became, at least in the beginning, religious and social rebels.
for example, this is what lala lajpat rai writes regarding the orthodox opposition to swami dayanand the amount of obloquy and persecution to which swami dayanand was exposed in his lifetime may be gathered from the fact that numerous attempts were made on his life by the orthodox hindus assassin were hired to kill him, missiles were thrown at him during his lectures and disputation he was called a hired emissary of the christians, an apostate, an atheist, and so on.
similarly, sayyid ahmed khan aroused the anger of the traditionalists.
they abused him, issued futwas religious decrees against him and even threatened his life.
the humanist aspect of the religious reform movements was expressed in the general attack on priesthood and rituals and the emphasis on the individuals right to interpret religious scriptures in the light of human reason and human welfare.
a significant feature of humanism was expressed in a new humanitarian morality which included the notion that humanity can progress and has progressed and that moral values are, ultimately, those which favour human progress.
the social reform movements were an embodiment of this new humanitarian morality.
apart from purely religious considerations, these religious reform movements fostered among indians greater selfrespect, selfconfidence, and pride in their country.
by interpreting their religious past in modern rational terms and by weeding out many of the corrupting and irrational elements from the 19th century religious beliefs and practices, the reformers enabled their followers to meet the official taunt that their religions and society were decadent and inferior.
as jawaharlal nehru has put it the rising middle classes were politically inclined and were rot so much in search of a religion but they wanted some cultural rools to cling on to, something that gave them assurance of their own worth, something that would reduce the sense of frustration and humiliation that foreign conquest and rule had produced.
226 modern india the religious reform movements helped many indians to come to terms with the modern world.
in fact they arose to recast the old religions into a new modern mould to suit the needs of new social groups of society.
thus pride in the past did not prevent indians from accepting the essential superiority of the modern world in general and modern science in particular.
of course, some people insisted that they were merely going back to the original, most ancient scriptures which, were suitably interpreted.
as a result of the reformed outlook, many indians began to acquire a modern, this worldly, secular and national outlook in place of a narrow outlook dominated by considerations of caste and religion, though the latter tendency by no means came to an end.
moreover, more and more people began to think in terms of promoting their physical and cultural welfare in this world in place of passively accepting their lot and waiting for improvement in life after death.
these movements also to some extent ended indias cultural and intellectual isolation from the rest of the world and enabled indians to share in the stream of world ideas.
at the same time, they were no longer bewitched by everything in the west in fact, those who copied the west blindly were increasingly looked down upon.
two negative aspccts of the religious reform movements may also be noted.
firstly, all of them catered to the needs of a small percentage of the population the urban middle and upper classes.
none of them could reach the vast masses of the peasantry and the urban poor, who continued by and large to lead their lives in tbe traditional, customridden ways.
this was because they basically gave voice to the urges of the educated and urban strata of indian society.
the second limitation, which later became a major negative factor, was the tendency to look backward, appeal to past greatness, and torely on scriptural authority.
these tended to go against the positive teachings of the reform movements themselves.
they undermined to some extent the supremacy of human reason and scientific outlook.
they encouraged mysticism in new garbs, and fostered pseudoscientific thinking.
appeals to past greatness created false pride and smugness, while the habit of finding a golden age in the past acted as a check on the full acceptance of modern science and hampered the effort to improve the present.
but, most of, all these tendencies tended to divide hindus, muslims, sikhs, and parsis as also high caste hindna from low caste hindus.
any overemphasis on religion in a country containing many religions was bound to have a divisive effect, moreover, the reformers put a onesided emphasis on the religious and philosophical aspects of the cultural heritage.
these aspects were, moreover, not a common heritage of all people.
on the other hand, art and architecture, literature, music, science and technology etc., in which all sections of people had played an equsl role were not sufficiently emphasised.
in addition, the hindu reformers invariably confined their praise of the indian past to its ancient period.
even a broadminded man like swami vivekananda talked of the indian spirit or indias past achievements in this sense alone.
these reformers looked upon the medieval period of indian history as essentially an era of deca dence.
this was not only unhistorical but also socially and politically harmful.
it growth of india after 1858 227 tended to create the notion of two separate peoples.
similarly an uncritical praise of the ancient period and religions could not be fully acceptable to the persons coming from lower castes who had for centuries suffered under the most destructive caste oppression which had developed precisely during the ancient period.
the result of all these factors was that instead of all indians taking an equal pride in their past material and cultural achievements and deriving inspiration from them, the past became a heritage of the few.
moreover the past itself tended to be torn into compartments on  partisan basis, many in the muslim middle classes went to the extent of turning to the history of west asia for their traditions and moments of pride.
increasingly, hindus, muslims, sikhs, and parsis, and later on lowercaste hindus who had been influenced by the reform movements tended to be different from one another, on the other hand, the hindu and muslim masses who followed traditional ways untouched by the reform movements still lived in harmony, practising their different religious rituals.
to some extent the process of the evolution of a composite culture that had been going on for centuries received a check, though in other sphere national unification of the indian people was accelerated.
the evil aspects of this phenomenon became apparent when it was found that, along with rapid rise of national conciousness, another consciousnesscommunal consciousnesshad begun to rise among the middle classes.
many other factors were certainly responsible for the birth of communalism in modern times but, undoubtedly the nature of religious reform movements also contributed towards it.
social reform the major effect of national awakening in the 19th ccntury was seen in the field of social reform.
the newly educated persons increasingly revolted against rigid social conventions and outdated customs.
they could no longer tolerate irrational and dehumanising social practices.
in their revolt they were inspired by the humanistic ideals of social equality and the equal worth of all individuals.
nearly all the religious reformers contributed to the social reform movement.
this was because the backward features of indian society, such as the caste system or inequality of sexes, had had religious sanctions in the past.
in addition, certain other organisations like the social con , ference, servants of india socicty, and the christian missionaries worked actively for social reform.
many prominent personsjotiba govind phule, oopal hari deshmukh, justice ranade, k. t. tclang, b.m.
malabari, d.k.
karve, sasipada banerjee, b.c.
pal, viresalingam, and b. r. ambedkar, and many othersalso played an important role.
in the 20th century, and especially after 1919, the national movement became the main propagator of social reform.
increasingly, the reformers took recourse to propaganda in the indian languages to reach the masses.
they also used novels, dramas, poetry, short stories, the press, and, in the thirties, the films to spread their views.
while social reform was linked with religious reform in some cases during the 19th century, in later years it was increasingly secular in approach.
moreover, many people who weie orthodox in their religious approach participated in it.
228 modern india similarly, in the beginning social reform had largely been the effort of newly educated indians belonging to higher castes to adjust their social behaviour to the requirements of modern western culture and values.
but gradually it penetrated down to the lower strata of society and began to revolutionise and reconstruct the social sphere.
in time the ideas and ideals of the reformers won almost universal acceptance and are today enshrined in the indian constitution.
the social reform movements tried in the main to achieve two objectives a emancipation of women and extension of equal rights to them and b removal of caste rigidities and in particular the abolition of untou chability.
emancipation of women for countless centuries women in india had been subordinated to men and socially oppressed.
the various religions practised in india as well as the personal laws based on them consigned women to a status inferior to that of men.
the condition of upper class women was in this respect worse than that of peasant women.
since the latter worked actively in the fields alongside men, they enjoyed relatively greater freedom of move ment an3 in some respects a better status in the family than the upper class women.
for example, they seldom observed purdah and many of them had the right to remarry.
the traditional view often praised the role of women as wives and mothers but as individuals they were assigned a very lowly social position.
they were supposed to have no personality of their own apart from their ties to their husbands.
they could not find any other expression to their inborn talents or desires except as housewives.
in fact, they were seen as just adjuncts to men.
for example, a woman could only marry once among hindus, a man was permitted to have more than one wife.
among muslims too this custom of polygamy prevailed.
in large parts of the country women had to live behind the purdah.
the custom of early marriage prevailed, and even children or eight or nine were married.
the widows could not remarry and had to lead an ascetic and restricted life.
in many parts of the country, the horrifying custom of sati or selfimmblation of widows prevailed.
hindu women had no right to inherit property, nor did they enjoy the right to terminate an undesirable marriage.
muslim women could inherit property but only half as such as a man could and in the matter of divorce even theoretically there was no equality between husband and wife.
in fact, muslim women dreaded divorce.
the social position of hindu and muslim women as well as their values were similar.
moreover, in both cases they were economically and socially totally dependent on men.
lastly, the benefit of education was denied to most of them.
in addition, women were taught to accept their subjection and even to welcome it as a badge of honour.
it is true that occasionally women of the character and personality of razia sultana, chand bibi, or ahilyabai holkar arose in india.
but they were exceptions to the general pattern, and do not in any way change the picture.
moved by the humanitarian and egalitarian impulses of the 19th century, the social reformers started a powerful movement to improve the position of women.
while some reformers appealed to doctrines of individualism and equality, others growth of india after 1858 229 declared that true hinduism or islam or zoroastrianism did not sanction the inferior status of women and that true religion assigned them a high social position.
numerous individuals, reform societies, and religious organisations worked hard to spread education among women, to encourage widow remarriage, to improve the living conditions of widows, to prevent marriage of young children, to bring women out of the purdah, enforce monogamy, and to enable middle class women to take up professions or public employment after the 1880s, when dufferin hospitals, named after lady dufferin, the wife of the viceroy, were started, efforts were made to make modern medicine and child delivery techniques available to indian women.
the movement for the liberation of women received a great stimulus from the rise of the militant national movement in the 20th century.
women played an active and important role in the struggle for freedom.
they participated in large numbers in the agitation against the partition of bengal and in the home rule movement.
after 1918 they marched in political processions, picketed shops selling foreign cloth and liquor, spun and propagated khadi, went to jail in the noncooperation movements, faced lathis, tear gas, and bulletsduringpublicdemonstrations,participated actively in the revolutionary terrorist movement, and voted in elections to legislatures and even stood as candidates.
safojim naidu, the famous poetess, became the president of the national congress.
several women became ministers or parliamentary secretaries in the popular ministries of 1937. hundreds of them became members of municipalities and other organs of local government.
when the trade union and kisan movements arose in the 1920s, women were often found in their forefront.
more than any other factor, participation in the national movement contributed to the awakening of indian women and their emancipation.
for how could those who had braved british jails and bullets be declared inferior 1 and how could they any longer be confined to the home and be satisfied with the life of a doll or a slave girl they were bound to assert their rights as human beings.
another important development was the birth of a womens movement in the country.
up to the 1920s enlightened men had woiked for the uplift of women.
now selfconscious and selfconfident women undertook the task.
they started many organisations and institutions for the purpose, the most outstanding of which was the all india womens conference founded in 1927. womens struggle for equality took a big step forward with the coming of independence.
articles 14 and 15 of the indian constitution 1950 guaranteed the complete equality of men and women.
the hindu succession act of 1955 made the daughter an equal coheir with the son.
the hindu marriage act of 1955 permuted dissolution of mamage on specific grounds.
monogamy has also been made mandatory on men as well as women but the evil custom of dowry still continues even though the demanding of dowry has been banned.
the constitution gives women equal right to work and to get employment in state agencies.
the directive principles of the constitution lay down the principle of 230 modern india equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
of course many visible and invisible obstacles still remain in putting the principle of the equality of sexes into practice.
a proper social climate has still to be creatcd.
but the social reform movement, the freedom struggle, womens own movement, and the constitution of free india have made a big contribution in this direction.
straggle against caste the caste system was another major target of attack for the social reform movement.
the hindus were at this time divided into numerous castes jolis.
the caste into which a man was bom determined large areas of his life.
it determined whom he would marry and with whom he would dine.
it largely determined his profession as also his social loyalties.
moreover, the castes were carefully graded into a hierarchy of status.
at the bottom of the ladder came the untouchables or scheduled castes as they came to be called later, who formed about 20 per cent of the hindu population.
the untouchables suffered from numerous and severe disabilities and restrictions, which of course varied from place to place.
their touch was considered impure and was a source of polution.
in some parts of the country, particularly in the south, their very shadow was to be avoided, so that they had to move away if a brahmin was seen or heard coming.
an untouchables dress, food, place of residence all were carefully regulated.
he could not draw water from wells and tanks used by the higher castes he could do so only from wells and tanks specially reserved for untouchables.
where no such well or tank existed, he had to drink dirty water from ponds and irrigation canals.
he could not enter the hindu temples or study the shastras.
often his children could not attend a school in which children of caste hindus studied.
public services such as the police and the army were closed to him.
the untouchables were forced to take up menial and other such jobs which were considered unclean, for example, scavenging, shoemaking, removing dead bodies, skinning dead animate, tanning hides and skins.
usually denied ownership of land, many of them worked even as tenantsatwiu and field labourers.
the caste system was an evil in another respect.
not only was it humiliating and inhuman and based on the antidemocratic principle of inequality by birth, it was a cause of social disintegration.
it splintered people into numerous groups.
in modern times it became a major obstacle in the growth of a united national feeling and the spread of democracy.
it may also be noted that caste consciousness particularly with regard to marriage prevailed also among muslims, christians, and sikhs, who practised untouchability though in a less virulent form.
british rule released many forces which gradually undermined the caste system.
the introduction of modem industries and railways and buses and growing urbanisation made it difficult to prevent mass contact among persons of different cashes, especially in the cities.
modem commerce and industry opened new fields of economic activity to all.
for example, a brahmin or upper caste merchant could hardly mil opportunity of trading in skins or shoes nor would he agree to himself the opportunity of growth of india after 1858 23 1 becoming a doctor or a soldier.
free s land upset the caste balance in many villages.
the close conn between caste and vocation could hardly continue in a modem indi society in which the profit motive was increasingly becoming dom in administration, the british introduced equality before law, took the judicial functions of caste panchayats, and gradually opened the of administrative services to all castes.
moreover, the new educa system was wholly secular and therefore basically opposed to caste di tions and caste outlook.
as modern democratic and rationalist ideas spread among ini they began to raise their voice against the caste system.
the br samaj, the prarthana samaj, the arya samaj, the ramakrishna mi the theosophists, the social conference, and nearly all the great refo of the 19th century, attacked it.
even though many of them deft the system of four varnas, they were critical of the caste jati s in particular they condemned the inhuman practice of untouchal they also realised that national unity and national progress in pol social, and economic fields could not be achieved so long as millions deprived of their rigtit to live with dignity and honour.
the growth of the national movement played a significant role in w ning the caste system.
the national movement was opposed to all institutions which tended to divide indian people.
common part tion in public demonstrations, giant public meetings, and satya struggles weakened caste consciousness.
in any case those who lighting for freedom from foreign rule in the name of liberty and eq could hardly support the caste system which was totally oppos these principles.
thus, from the beginning, the indian national coi and in fact the entire national movement opposed caste privilege fought for equal civic rights and equal freedom for the developme the individual without distinctions of caste, sex or religion.
all his life gandhiji kept the abolition of untouchability in the front of his public activities.
in 1932, he founded the all india h. sangh for the purpose.
since the middle of the 19th century, numerous individuals, organisations worked to spread education among the untouct or depressed classes and scheduled castes as they came to be  laferv to open the doors of schools and temples to them, to enable to use public wells and tanks, and to remove other social disab and distinctions from which they suffered.
as education and awakening spread, the lower castes themselves 1 to stir.
they became conscious of their basic human rights and 1 to rise in defence of these rights.
they gradually built up a powerful movement against the traditional oppression by the higher castes.
dr, b. r. ambedkar, who belonged to one of the scheduled castes, devoted his entire life to fighting against caste tyranny.
he organised the ah india depressed classes federation for the purpose.
several other scheduled caste leaders founded the all india depressed classes associa tion.
in south india, the nonbrahmins organised during the i920s the self respect movement to fight the disabilities which brahmins had imposed upon them.
numerous satyagraha movements were organised all over india by the depressed castes against the ban on their entry into temples and other such restrictions.
the struggle against untouchability could not, however, be fully successful 232 modern india under alien rule.
the foreign government was afraid of arousing the hostility of the orthodox sections of society.
only the government of a free india could undertake a radical reform of society.
moreover, the problem of social uplift was closely related to the problem of political and economic uplift.
for example, economic progress was essential for raising the social status of the depressed castes 90 also was spread of education and political rights.
this was fully recognised by indian leaders.
dr. ambedkar, for example, said nobody can remove your grievance as well as you can and you cannot remove these unless you get political power into your bands... we must have a government in which men in power will not be afraid to amend the social and economic ccde of life which the dictates of justice and expediency to urgently call for.
this role the british government will never be able to play.
it is only a government wbich is of tbe people, for the people and by the people, in other words, it ia only the swaraj government that will make it possible.
the constitution of 1950 has provided the legal framework for the final abolition of untouchability.
it has declared that  untouchability is abolished and its practice in any form is forbidden.
the endorsement of any disability arising out ofuntouchability shall be an offence puai shable in accordance with law.
the constitution further forbids any restrictions on the use of wells, tanks, and bathing ghats, or on the access to shops, restaurants, hotels and cinemas.
furthermores one of the directive principles it has laid down for the guidance of future governments says the state shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
struggle against the evils of the caste system, however, still remains an urgent task before the indian people, especially in the rural areas.
ex er c ises 1. examine the rationalist and humanistic content of the religious reform movements of the 19th century.
evaluate their role in the making of modern india.
2. what were some of the disabilities from which wonjen suffered in traditional indian society discuss the steps taken by the modern reform movements for their emancipation.
3. why did the modern social reforms find it necessary to attack the caste system how did changes in economy, society, and politics and reform movements undermine it 4. wnte short notes on a brahmo samaj, b religious reform in maharashtra, c ramalcrishna, d swami vivekananda, e swami dayanand and arya samaj, f sayyid ahmad khan, g the akali movement.
ch ap t e r x iv nationalist movement 19051918 growth of militant nationalism radually, over the years, the trend of militant nationalism also known as extremism had been growing in the country.
it found expression in the movement against the partition of bengal in 1905. the indian national movement even in its early days had increasingly made latge number of people constious.of the eviis of foreign domination and of the need for fostering patriotism.
it had imparted the necessary political training to the educated indians.
it had, in fact, changed the temper of the people and created a new life in the country.
at the same time, the failure of the british government to accept any of the important demands of the nationalists produced disillusionment among the politically conscious people with the principles and methods of the dominant moderate leadership.
there was a strong demand for more vigorous political action and methods than those of meetings, petitions, memorials, and speeches in the legislative councils.
recognition of the true nature of british role the politics of the moderate nationalists were founded on the belief that british rule could be reformed from within.
but the spread of knowledge regarding political and economic questions gradually undermined this belief.
the political agitation of the moderates was itself responsible for this to a large extent.
the nationalist writers and agitators blamed british rule for the poverty of the people.
politically conscious indians were convinced that the purpose of british rule was to exploit india economically, that is, to enrich england at the cost of india.
they realised that india could make little progress in the economic field unless liritish imperialism was replaced by a government controlled and run by the indian people.
in particular, the nationalists came to see that indian industries could not flourish except under an indian government which could protect and promote them.
the evil economic consequences of foreign rule were symbolised in the eyes of the people by the disastrous famines which ravaged india from 1896 to 1900 and took a toll of over 90 lakhs of lives.
g 236 modern india the political events of the years 1892 to 1905 also disappointed the nationalists and made them think of more radical politics.
the indian councils act of 1892, discussed in chapter xii, was a complete disappointment.
on the other hand, even the existing political rights of the people were attacked.
in 1898, a law was passed making it an offence to excite feelings of disaffection towards the foreign government.
in 1899, the number of indian members in the calcutta corpoiation was reduced.
in 1904, the indian official secrets act was passed restricting the freedom of the press.
the natu brothers were deported in 1897 without being tried even the charges against them were not made public.
in the same year, lokamanya tilak and other newspaper editors were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for arousing the people against the foreign government.
thus, the people found that, instead of giving them wider political rights, the rulers were taking away even their few existing rights.
the anti congress attitude of lord curzon convinced more and more people that it was useless to expect any political and economic advance as long as britain ruled india.
even the moderate leader gokhale complained that the bureaucracy was growing frankly selfish and openly hostile to national aspirations.
even socially and culturally, the british rule was no longer progressive.
primary and technical education was not making any progress.
at the same time, the officials were becoming suspicious of higher education and were even trying to discourage its spread in the country.
the indian universities act of 1904 was seen by the nationalists ss an attempt to bring indian universities under tighter official control and to check the growth of higher education.
thus an increasing number of indiaus were getting convinced that self government was essential for the sake of the economic, political, and cultural progress of the country and that political enslavement meant stunting the growth of the indian people.
growth of selfrcspect and selfconfidence by the end of the 19th century, the indian nationalists had grown ia self respect and selfconfidence.
they had acquired faith in their capacity to govern themselves and in the future development of their country.
leaders like tilak and bipin chandra pal preached the message of selfrespect and asked the nationalists to rely on the character and capacities of the indian people.
they taught the people that the remedy to their sad condition lay in their own hands and that they should therefore become fearless and strong.
swami vivekananda, though not a political leader, again and again drove home this message.
he declared if there is a sin in the world it is weakness avoid al weakness, weakness is sin, weakness is death.. .and here is the test of truthanything that makes you weak physically, intellectually and spiritually, reject as poison, there u no life loit.it cqnnot be true.
he also urged the people to give up living on the glories of the past and manfully build the future.
when, o lord, he wrote, shall our land be free from this eternal dwelling upon the past  nationalist movement 19051918 237 the belief in selfeffort also created an urge for extending the national movement.
no longer should the nationalist cause rely on a few upper class educated indians.
instead, political consciousness of the masses was to be aroused.
thus, for example, swami vivekananda wrote the only hope of india is from the masses.
the upper classes are physically and morally dead.
there ws the realisation that only the masses could make the immense sacrifices needed to win freedom.
moreover, the nationalist leaders felt that political activity should be carried on continuously and not merely on the few days on which the national congress or the provincial conferences met.
growth of education and unemployment by the close of the 19th century, the number of educated indians had increased perceptively.
large numbers of them worked in the administration on extremely low salaries, while many others increasingly faced unemployment.
their economic plight made them look critically at the nature of british rule.
many of them were attracted by radical nationalist politics.
even more important was the ideological aspect of the spread of education.
the larger the number of educated indians, the larger was the area of influence of western ideas of democracy, nationalism, and radicalism.
the educated indians became the best propagators and followers of militant nationalism both because they were lowpaid .or unemployed and because they were educated in modern thought and politics and european and world history.
international influences several events abroad during this period tended to encourage the growth of militant nationalism in india.
the rise of modem japan after 1868 showed that a backward asian country could develop iuelf without western conti ol.
in a matter of a few decades, the japanese leaders made their country a first rate industrial and military power, introduced universal primary education, and evolved an efficient, modem administration.
the defeat of the italian army by the ethopians in 1896 and of russia by japan in 1905 exploded the myth of european superiority.
everywhere in asia people heard with enthusiasm the news of the victory of a small asian country over the biggest military power of europe.
for example, the following comment appeared in the marathi weekly, the kesari, edited by tilak, in the issue dated 6 december 1904 it was up to this time supposed that the asiatics lacked the sentiment of nationality and were, therefore, unable to hold their own before the european nations in.
spite of their individual courage and heroism.
it was further believed that the continents of asia, africa, and america were created by providence o be dominated by european nations.. the russojapanese war has given a rude shock to these beliefs, and those who hold them are now beginning to sec that.. there is nothing inherently improbable in the asiatics forming themselves into independent nations and taking ranlc with their european rivals.
another newspaper, the karachi chronicle of 18 june 1905, expressed the popular feeling as follows 238 modern india what one asiatic has done others can d o.
.. .if japan can drub russia, india can drub england with equal e ase .. .
.let us drive the british into he sea and take our place side by side with japan among the great powers of the world.
revolutionary movements in ireland, russia, egypt, turkey, and china and the boer war in south africa convinced the indians that a united people willing to make sacrifices could challenge even ihe most powerful of despotic governments.
what was needed more than anything else was a spirit of patriotism and selfsacrifice.
existence of a militant nationalist school of thought from almost the beginning of the national movement a school of militant nationalism had existed in the country.
this school was represented by leaders jike rajnarain bose and ashwini kumar dutt in bengal and vishnu shastri chiplunkar in maharashtra.
the most outstanding representative of this school was bal gangadhar tilak later popularly known as lokamanya tilak.
he was bom in 1856. from the day of his graduation from the bombay university, he devoted his entire life to the service of his country.
he helped to found during the 1880s the new english school, which later became the fergusson college, and the newspapers the mahratta in english and the kesari in marathi.
from 1889, he edited the kesari and preached nationalism in its columns and taught people to become courageous, selfreliant, and selfless fighters in the cause of indias independence.
in 1893, he started using the traditional religious ganpati festival to propagate nationalist ideas through songs and speeches, and in 1895 he started the shivaji festival to stimulate nationalism among young maharashtrians by holding up the example of shivaji for emulation.
during 18961897 he initiated a notax campaign in maharashtra.
he asked the famine stricken peasants of maharashtra to withhold payment of land revenue if their crops had failed.
he set a real example of boldness and sacrifice when the authorities arrested him in 1897 on the charge of spreading hatred and disaffection against the government.
he refused to apologise to the government and was sentenced to 18 months rigorous imprisonment.
thus he became a living symbol of the new national spirit of selfsacrifice, at the dawn of the 20th century the school of militant nationalists found a favourable political climate and its adherents came forward to lead the second stage of the national movement.
the most outstanding leaders of militant nationalism, apart from lokamanya tilak, were bipin chandra pal, aurobindo ghose, and lalalajpat rai.
the distinctive political aspects of the programme of the militant nationalists were as follows they believed that indians themselves must work out their own salvation and make the effort to rise from their degraded position.
they declared that great sacrifices and sufferings were needed for this task.
their speeches, writings, and political work were full of boldness and selfconfidence and they considered no personal sacrifice too great for the good of their country.
nationalist movement 19051918 239 they denied that india could progress under the benevolent guidance and control of the english.
tlicy deeply hated foreign rule, and they declared in a clearcut manner that jfaara or independence was the goal of the national movement.
they had deep faith in the strength of the masses and they planned to achieve swaraj through mass action.
they therefore pressed for political work among the masses and for direct political action by the masses.
a trained leadership by 1905 india possessed a large number of leaders who had acquired during the previous period valuable experience in guiding political agitations and loading political struggles.
without a trained band of political workers it would have been difficult to lake the national movement to a higher political stage.
the partition of bengal thus the conditions for the emergence of militant nationalism had developed when in 1905 the partition of bengal was announced and the indian national movement entered its second stage.
on 20 july 1905, lord curzon issued an order dividing the province of bengal into two parts eastern bengal and assam with a population of 31 millions, and the rest of bengal with a population of 54 millions, of whom 18 millions were bengalis and 36 millions biharies and delegates to the session of the indian national congress held at amritsar in december 1919. seated on chair, right lo left ale medan mohan malaviya, annie besant, swami shradhanand, motilal nehru, bal gangadhar tilak.
lala lajpat rai is standing behind swami shradhanand.
sitting on the ground left to right, are jawaharlal nehru, s. satyamuili courtesy nehru memorial museum and library 240 modern india onyas, it was said that the existing province of bengal was too big to be efficiently administered by a single provincial government.
however, the officials who worked out the plan had also other ends in view.
they hoped to stem the rising tide of nationalism in bengal.
risley, home secretary to the goverment of india, wrote in an official note on 6 december 1904 bengal united is a power bengal divided will pull several different ways.
that is what the congress leaders feel their apprehensions are perfectly correct and they form one of the great merits of the scheme.. .in this scheme as in the matter of the amalgamation of berar to the central provinces one of our main.objects is to split up and thereby to weaken a solid body of opponents to our rule.
curzon himself wrote in a similar vein in february 1905 calcutta is the centre from which the congress party is manipulated throughout the whole of bengal and indeed the whole of india .
.any measure in consequence that would divide the bengalispeaking population that would permit independent centres of activity and influence to grow up that would dethrone calcutta from its place as the centre of successful intrigue... is intensely and hotly resented by them.
the indian national congress and the nationalists of bengal firmly opposed th partition.
within bengal, different sections of the populationzamindars, merchants, lawyers, students, the city poor, and even womenrose up in spontaneous opposition to the partition of their province.
the nationalists saw the act of partition as a challenge to indian nationalism and not merely an administrative measure.
they saw that it was a deliberate attempt to divide the bengalis and to disrupt and weaken nationalism in bengal.
1 it would also be a big blow to the growth of bengali language and culture.
they pointed out that administrative efficiency could have been better secured by separating the hindispeaking bihar and the oryia speaking orissa from the bengali speaking part of the province.
moreover, the official step had been taken in utter disregard of public opinion.
thus the vehemence of bengals protest against the partition is explained by the fact that it was a blow to the sentiments of a very sensitive and courageous people.
the antipartition movement or the swadeshi and boycott movement the antipartition movement was the work of the entire national leadership of bengal and not of any one section of the movement.
its most prominent leaders at the ihitial stage were moderate leaders like surendranath banerjea and krishna kumar mitra militant and revolutionary nationalists took over in the later stages.
in fact, both the moderate and militant nationalists cooperated with one another during the course of the movement.
the antipartition movement was initiated on 7 august 1905. on that day a massive demonstration against the partition, was organised in the town hall in calcutta.
from this meeting delegates dispersed to spread the movement to the rest of the province.
the partition took effect on 16 october 1905. the leaders of the protest nationalist movement 19051918 241 movement declared it to be a day of national mourning throughout bengal.
it was observed as a day of fasting.
there was a hartal in calcutta.
people walked barefooted and bathed in the ganga in the early morning hours.
rabindranath tagore composed a national sang for the occasion, which was sung by huge crowds parading the streets.
the streets of calcutta were full of the cries of bande matctram which overnight became the national song of bengal and which was soon to become the theme song of the national movement.
the ceremony of raksha bandhan was utilised in a new way.
on that day people of bengal tied the rakki on one anothers wrists as a symbol of the unbreakable unity of the bengalis and of the two halves of bengal.
in the afternoon, there was a great demonstration when the veteran leader anandamohan bose laid the foundation of a federation hall to mark the indestructible unity of bengal.
he addressed a crowd of over 50,000 and the meeting passed a resolution pledging to do their utmost to maintain the unity of bengal.
the swadeshi and boycott th bengal leaders felt that mere demonstrations, public meetings, and resolutions were not likely to have much effect on the rulers.
more positive action that would reveal the intensity of popular feelings and exhibit them at their best was needed.
the answer was swadeshi and boycott, mass meetings were held all over bengal where swadeshi or use of indian goods and boycott of british goods were proclaimed and pledged.
la many places public burnings of foreign cloth were organised and shops selling foreign cloth were picketed.
the swadeshi movement was an immense success, according to surendranath banerjea swadeshisra during the days of its potency coloured the entire texture of our social and domestic life.
marriage presents that included foreign goods, the like of which could be manufactured at home, were returned.
priests would often decline to officiate at ceremonies where foreign articles were offered as oblations to the gods.
guests would refuse to participate in festivities where foreign salt or foreign sugar was used.
the swadeslii movement gave a great deal of encouragement to indian industries.
many textile mills, soap and match factories, handloom weaving concerns, national banks, and insurance companies were opened.
acharya p.c.
ray organised his famous bengal chemical swadeshi stores.
even the great poet rabindranath tagore helped to open 4 swadeshi store.
the swadeshi movement had several consequences in the realm of culture.
there was a flowering of nationalist poetry, prose and journalism.
the patriotic songs written at the time by poets like rabindranath tagore, rajani kant sen, and mukunda das are sung in bengal to this day.
another constructive activity undertaken at the time was that of national education.
national educational institutions where literary, technical, or physical education was imparted were opened by nationalists who regarded the existing system of education as denationalising and, in any case, inadequate.
242 modern india on 15 august 1906, a national council of education was set up.
a national college with aurobindo ghose as principal was started in calcutta.
the bole of students, women, muslims, and the masses a prominent part in the swadeshi agitation was played by the students of bengal.
they practised and propagated swadeshi and took the lead in organising picketing of shops selling foreign cloth.
they were perhaps the main creators of the swadeshi spirit in bengal.
the government made every attempt to suppress the students.
orders were issued to penalise those schools and colleges whose students took an active part  in the swadeshi agitation their gran tsinaid and other privileges were to be withdrawn  they were to be disaffiliated, their students were not to be permitted to compete for scholarships and were to be barred from all service under the government.
disciplinary action was taken against students found guilty of participating in the nationalist agitation.
many of them were fined, expelled from schools and colleges, arrested, and sometimes beaten by the police with lathis.
the students, however, refused to be cowed down.
a remarkable aspect of the swadeshi agitation was the active participation of women in the movement.
the traditionally homecentred women of the urban middle classes joined processions and picketing.
from then on they were to take an active part in the nationalist movement.
many prominent muslims joined the swadeshi movement including abdul rasul, the famous barrister, liaquat husain, the popular agitator, and guznavi, the businessman.
many other middle and upper class muslims, however, remained neutral, or, led by the nawab of dacca, who was given a loan of rs.
14 lakhs by the government, of india even supported partition on the plea that east bengal would have a muslim majority.
in this communal attitude, the nawab of dacca and others were encouraged by the officials.
in a speech at dacca, lord curzon declared that one of the reasons for the partition was to invest the mohammedans in eastern bengal with a unity which they have not enjoyed since the days of the old mussalman viceroys and kings.
in spite of the popular character of the antipartition movement and of the desire of the militant nationalists to take the national movement to the masses, the movement did not really affect and involve the peasantry of bengal.
it was confined on the whole to the towns and to the upper and lower middle classes of the province.
allindia aspect of the movement the cry of swadeshi and swaraj was soon taken up by other provinces of india.
movements of support for bengals unity and boycott of foreign goods were organised in bombay, madras, and northern india.
the leading role in spreading the swadeshi movement to the rest of the country was played by tilak.
tilak quickly saw that with the inauguration of this movement in bengal a new chapter in the history of indian nationalism had opened.
here was a challenge and an nationalist movement 19051918 243 opportunity to lead a popular struggle against the british rajafid 0 unite the entire country in one bond of common sympathy.
growth of militancy the leadership of the antipartition movement soon passed to militant nationalists like tilak, bipin chandra pal, and aurobindo ghose, this was due to many factors.
firstly, the early movement of protest led by the moderates failed to yield results.
even the liberal secretary of state, john morley, from whom much was expected by the moderate nationalists, declared the partition to be a settled fact which would not be changed.
secondly, the government of the two bengals, particularly of east bengal, made active efforts to divide hindus and muslims.
seeds of hindumuslim disunity in bengal politics were perhaps sown at this time.
this embittered the nationalists.
but, most of all, it was the repressive policy of the government which led people to militant and revolutionary politics.
the government of east bengal, in particular, tried to crush the nationalist movement.
official attempts at preventing student participation in the swadeshi agitation have already been discussed above.
the shouting of bcnde  matarsm in public streets in east bengal was banned.
public meetings were restricted and sometimes forbidden.
laws controlling the press were enacted.
swadeshi workers were prosecuted and imprisoned for long periods.
many students were awarded even corporal punishment.
from 1906 to 1909, more than 550 political cases came up before bengal courts.
prosecutions against, a large number of nationalist newspapers were launched and freedom of the press was completely suppressed.
military police was stationed in many towns where it clashed with the people.
one of the most notorious examples of repression was the police assault on the peaceful delegates of tlie bengal provincial conference at barisal in april 1906. many of the young volunteers were severely beaten up and tjie conference itself was forcibly dispersed.
in december 1908, ninebengal leaders, including the venerable krishna kumar mitra and ashwini kumar dutt, were deported.
earlier, in 1907, lala lajpat rai and ajit singh had been deported following riots in the canal colonies of the punjab, in 1908, the great tilak was again arrested and given the savage sentence of 6 years imprisonment.
chidambaram pillai in madras and harisarvottam rao and others in andhra were put behind the bars.
as the militant nationalists came to the fore they gave the call for passive resistance in addition to swadeshi and boycott.
they asked the people to infuse to cooperate with the government and, to boycott government service, the courts, and government schools and colleges.
as aurobindo ghose put it, their programme was to make the administration under present conditions impossible by an organised refusal to do anything which shall help either the british commerce in the exploitation of the country or british officialdom in 244 modern india the administration of itunless and until the conditions are changed in the manner and to the extent demanded by the people.
the militant nationalists used the swadeshi and antipartition agitation to arouse the people politically and gave the slogan of independence from foreign rule.
aurobidno ghose openly declared political freedom is the lifebreath of a nation.
thus, the queston of the partition of bengal became a secondary one and the question of indias freedom became the central question of indian politics.
the militant nationalists also gave the call for self sacrifice without which no great aim could be achieved.
the youth of india responded enthusiastically to the call.
jawaharlal nehru, who was studying in england at the time, described the reaction of young india in the following words in his autobiography from 1907 onwards for several years india was seething with untest and trouble.
for the first time since the revolt of 1857 india was showing fight and not submitting tamely to foreign rule.
news of tilaks activities and his conviction, of aurobindo ghose and the way the masses of bengal were taking the swadeshi and boycott pledge stirred all of us indians in england.
almost without an exception we were tilakites or extremists, as the new party was called in india.
it should be remembered, however, that the militant nationalists also failed in giving a positive lead to the people.
they were not able to give effective leadership or to create a sound organisation to guide their movement.
they aroused the people but did not know how to harness or utilise the newly released energies of the people.
moreover, though they were radical in their nationalist beliefs, they remained constitutionalists in practice.
they also failed to reach the real masses of the country, the peasants.
their movement remained confined to the urban lower and middle classes.
even among them they could not organise an effective party.
consequently, the government succeeded to a large extent in suppressing them.
their movement could not survive the arrest of their main leader, tilak, and the retirement from active politics of bipia chandra pal and aurobindo ghose.
but the upsurge of nationalist sentiments could not die.
people had been aroused from their slumber of centuries they had learned to take a bold and fearless attitude in politics.
they now waited for a new movement to arise.
moreover, they were able to learn valuable lessons from their experience.
gandhiji wrote later that after the partition, people saw that petitions must be backed up by force, and that they must be capable of suffering.
the anti partition agitation in fact marked a great revolutionary leap forward for indian nationalism.
growth of revolutionary terrorism government repression and frustration caused by the failure of the political struggle ultimately resulted in revolutionary terrorism.
the youth of bengal were angered by official arrogance and repression and were filled with burning hatred for foreign rule.
they foupd all avenues of peaceful protest and political action blocked and out of desperation they fell back upon the cult of the bomb.
they no longer believed that passive resistance could achieve nationalist aims.
the british nationalist movement 19051918 245 must, therefore, be physically expelled.
as the yugantar wrote on 22 april 1906 after the barisal conference the remedy lies with the people themselves.
the 30 crores of people inhabiting india must raise their 60 crores of hands to stop this curse of oppression.
force must be stopped by force, but the revolutionary youngmen did not try to generate a mass revolution.
instead, they decided to copy the methods of the irish terrorists and the russian nihilists, that is, to assassinate unpopular officials.
a beginning had been made in this direction when in 1897 the chapekar brothers assassinated two unpopular british officials at poona.
in 1904, v.d.
savarkar had organised the abhinava bharat, a secret society of revolutionaries.
after 1905, several newspapers had begun to advocate revolutionary terrorism, the sandhya and the yugan tar in bengal and the kal in.
maharashtra were the most prominent among them.
in december i90san attempt was made on the life of the lieutenant governor of bengal, and in april 1908 khudiram bose and prafulla chaki threw a bomb at a carriage which they believed was occupied by kingsford, the unpopular judge at muzzaffarpur.
prafulla chaki shot himself dead while khudiram bose was tried and hanged.
the era of revolutionary terrorism had begun.
many secret societies of terrorist youth came into existence.
the most famous of these was the anushilan samiti whose dacca section alone had 500 branches.
soon terrorist societies became active in the rest of the country also.
they became so bold as to throw a bomb at the viceroy, lord hardinge, while he was riding on an elephant in a state procession at delhi.
the viceroy was wounded.
the terrorists also established centres of activity abroad.
in london the lead was taken by shyamji krishftavarma, v.d, savarkar, and har dayal, while in europe madam cama and ajit singh were the prominent leaders.
terrorism too gradually petered out.
in fact terrorism as a political weapon was bound to fail.
it could hardly have achieved its declared objective of expelling the english.
but tle terrorists did make a valuable contribution to the growth of nationalism in india.
as a historian has put it, they gave us back the pride of our manhood.
because of their heroism, the terrorists became immensely popular among their compatriots even though most of the politically conscious people did not agree with their political approach.
i  r  the indian national congress, 190j1914 the agitation against the partition of bengal made a deep impact on the indian national congress.
all sections of the national congress united in opposing the partition.
at its session of 1905, gokbale, the president of the congress, roundly condemned the partition as well as the reactionary regime of curzon.
the national congress also supported the swadeshi and boycott movement of bengal.
there was much public debate and disagreement between the moderate and the militant nationalists.
while the latter wanted to extend the mass movement in bengal as well as in the rest of the country, the moderates wanted to confine the 246 modern india movement to bengal and even there to limit it to swadeshi and boycott, there was a tussle between the two groups for the presidentship of the national congress for that year.
in the end, dadabhai naoroji, respected by all nationalists as a great patriot, was chosen as a compromise.
dadabhai electrified the nationalist ranks by openly declaring in his presidential address that the goal of the indian national movement was selfgovernment or swaraj, like that of the 1 united kingdom or the colonies.
but the differences dividing the two wings of the nationalist movement could not be kept in check for long.
many of the moderate nationalists did not keep pace with events.
they were not able to see that their outlook1 and methods, which had served a real purpose in the past, were no longer adequate.
they had failed to advance to the new stage of the national movement.
the militant nationalists, on the other hand, were not willing to be held back.
the split between the two came at the surat session of the national congress in december 1907 the moderate leaders having captured the machinery of the congress excluded the militant elements from it.
but, in the long run, the split did not prove useful to either party.
the moderate leaders lost touch with the younger generation of nationalists.
the british government played the game of divide and rule and tried to win over moderate nationalist opinion so that the militant nationalists could be isolated and suppressed.
to placate the moderate nationalists it announced constitutional concessions through the indian councils act of 1909 which are known as1 the morleyminto reforms of 1909. in 1911, tile government also announced the cancellation of the partition of bebgal.
western and eastern bengals were to be reunited while a new province consisting of bihar and orissa was to be created.
at the same time the beat of the central government was shifted from calcutta to delhi, the morieymint6 reforms increased the number of elected members in the imperial legislative council and the provincial councils.
but most of the elected members were elected indirectly, by the provincial councils in the case of the imperial council and by municipal committees and district boards in the case of provincial councils.
some of the elected seats wtffe reserved for landlords and british capitalists in india.
for instance, of the 68 members of the imperial legislative council, 36 were officials and 5 were nominated non officials.
of the 27 elected members, 6 were to represent the big landlords and 2 the british capitalists.
moreover the reformed councils still enjoyed no real power, being merely advisory bodies.
the reforms in no way changed the undemocratic and foreign character of british rule or the fact of foreign economic exploitation of the country.
they were, in fact, not designed to demo cratise indian administration.
morley openly declared at the time if it could be said that this chapter of reforms led directly or necessarily to the establishment of a parliamentary system in india, i for one would have nothing at all to do with it.
his successor as secretary of state, lord crewe, further clarified the position in 1912 there is a certain section in india which looks forward to a measure of nationalist movement 19051918 247 selfgovernment approaching that which has been granted in the dominions.
i see no future for india on those lines.
the real purpose of the reforms of 1909 was to confuse the moderate nationalists, to divide the nationalist tanks, and to check the growth of unity among indians.
the reforms also introduced the system of separate electorates under which all muslims were grouped in separate constituencies from which muslims alone could be elected.
this was done in the name of protecting the muslim minority.
but in reality this was a part of the policy of dividing hindus and muslims and thus maintaining british supremacy in india.
the system of separate electorates was based on the notion that the political and economic interests of hindus and muslims were separate.
this notion was unscientific because religions cannot be the basis of political and economic interests or of political groupings.
what is even more important, this system proved extremely harmful in practice.
it checked the progress of indias unification which had been a continuous historical process.
it became a potent factor in the growth of coiumu nalismboth muslim and hinduin the country.
instead of removing the educational and economic backwardness of the middle class muslims and thus integrating them into the mainstream of indian nationalism, the system of separate electorates tended to perpetuate their isolation from the developing nationalist movement.
it encouraged separatist tendencies.
it prevented people from concentrating on economic and political problems which were common to all indians, hindus or muslims.
the moderate nationalists did not fully support the morleyminto reforms.
they soon realised that the reforms had not really granted ipuch.
but they decided to cooperate with the government in working the reforms.
this cooperation with the government and their opposition to the programme of the militant nationalists proved very costly to them.
they gradually lost the respect and support of the public and were reduced to a small political group.
the vast majority of the politically conscious indians continued to support, hough passively, lokamanya tilak and the militant nationalists.
the muslim league and the growth of communalism modern political conscionsness was late in developing among the muslims.
as nationalism spread among the hindus and parsees of the lower middle class, it failed to grow equally rapidly among the muslims of the same class.
as we have seen earlier, hindus and muslims had fought shoulder to shoulder during the revolt of 1857i in fact, after the suppression of the revolt, the british officials had taken a particularly vindictive attitude towards the muslims, hanging 27,000 muslims in delhi alone.
from now on the muslims were in.
general looked upon with suspicion.
but this attitude changed in the 1870s.
with the rise of the nationalist movement the british statesmen grew apprehensive about the safety and stability of their empire in india, to check the growth of united national feeling in the country, they decided to follow more actively the policy of 248 modern india divide and riile and to divide the people along religious lines, in other wordb to encourage communal and separatist tendencies in indian politics.
for this purpose they decided to come out as champions of the muslims and to win over to their side muslim zamindars, landlords, and the newly educated.
they also fostered other divisions in indian society.
they promoted provincialism by talking of bengali domination.
they tried to utilise the caste structure to turn the non brahmins against brahmins and the lower castes against the higher castes.
7n u.p, and bihar, where hindus and muslims had always lived in peace, they actively encouraged the movement to replace urdu as a court language by hindi.
in other words, they tried to use even the legitamate demands of different sections of indian society t create divisions among the indian people.
in the rise of the separatist tendency along communal lines sayyid ahmad khan played an important role.
though a great educationist and social reformer, sayyid ahmad khan bccame towards the end of his life a conservative in politics.
he laid the foundations of muslim communalism when in the 1660s he gave up his earlier views and declared that the political interests of hindus and muslims were not the same but different and even divergent.
he also preached complete obedience to british rule.
when the indian national congress was founded in 18s, he decided to oppose it and tried to organise along with raja shiva prasad of varanasi a movement of loyalty to british rule.
he also began to preach that, since the hindus formed the larger part of the indian population, they would dominate the muslims in case of the weakening or willi drawal of british, rule.
he urged the muslims not to listen to badruddin tyabjis appeal to them to join the national congress.
these views were of course unscientific and without any basis in reality.
even though hindus and muslims followed different religions, their economic and political interests were the same.
even socially and culturally the hindu and muslim masses as well as classes had developed common ways of life.
a bengali muslim and a bengali hindu had much more in common than a bengali muslim and a punjabi muslim had.
moreover hindus and muslims were being equally and jointly oppressed and exploited by british imperialism.
even sayyid ahmad khan had said in 1884 do you not inhabit the same land are you not burned and buried on the tame toil do you not tread the same ground and live upon the same soil remember that the words hindu and mohammedan are only meant for religious distinction otherwise all persons, whether hindu or mohammedan, even the christians who reside in this country, are all in this particular respect belonging to one and the same nation.
then all these different sects can be described as one nation, they must each and all unite for the good of the country which is common to au.
the question then arises how could the communal and separatist trend of thinking grow among the muslims this was to some extent due to the relative backwardness of the muslims in education and trade and industry.
muslim upper classes consisted mostly of zamindars and aristocrats.
because the upper class muslims during the first 70 years of the 19th century were very antibritish, conservative and hostile to modern education, the number of educated muslims in the country remained nationalist movement 19051918 249 very small.
consequently, modern western thought with its emphasis on science, democracy, and nationalism did not spread among muslim intellectuals, who remained traditional and backward.
later, as a result of the efforts of sayyid ahmad khan, nawab abdul latif, badruddin tyabji and others, modern education spread among muslims.
but the proportion of the educated was far lower among muslims than among hindus, par sees, or christians.
similarly, the muslims had also taken little part in the growth or trade and industry.
the small number of educated persons and men of trade and industry among the muslims enabled the reactionary big landlords to maintain their influence over the muslim masses.
as we have seen earlier, landlords and zamindars, whether hindu or muslim, supported british rule out of self interest.
but, among the hindus, the modem intellectuals and the rising commercial and industrialist class had pushed out the landlords from leadership.
unfortunately, the opposite remained the case with the muslims.
the educational backwardness of the muslims had another harmful consequence.
since modern education was writ for, ten try into government service or the professions, the muslims had also lagged behind the nonmuslims in this respect.
moreover, the government had consciously discriminated against the muslims after 1858, holding them largely responsible for the revolt of 1857, when modern education did spread among the muslims the educated muslim found few opportunities in business or the professions.
he inevitably looked for government employment.
and, in.
any case, india being a backward colony, there were very few opportunities of employment for its people.
in these circumstances, it was easy for the british officials and the loyalist muslim leaders to incite the educated muslims against the educated hindus.
sayyid ahmad khan and others raised the demand for special treatment for the muslims in the matter of government service.
they declared that if the educated muslims remained loyal to the british, the latter would reward them with government jobs and other special favours.
some loyalist hindus and parsees too tried to argue in this manner, but they remained a small minority, the result was that while in the country as a whole, independent and nationalist lawyers, journalists, students, merchants and industrialists were becoming political leaders, among the muslims loyalist landlords and retired government servants still influenced political qpinion.
bombay was the only province where the muslims had taken to commerce and education quite early and there the nationalist congress included in its ranks such brilliant muslims as badruddin tyabji, r.m.
sayani, a. bhimji, and the young barrister muhammad ali jinnah.
we can sum up this aspect of the problem with a quotation from jawaharlal nehrus the discovery of india there has been a difference of a generation or more in 1he development of the hindu and muslim middle classes, and that difference continues to show itself in many directions, political, economic, and other.
it is this lag which produces a psychology of fear among tbe muslims.
as students of history we should also know that the manner in which indian 250 modern india history was taught in schools and colleges in those days also contributed to the growth of communalist feelings among the educated hindus and muslims.
british historians and, following thn, indian historians described the medieval period of indian history as the muslim period.
the rule of turk, afghan, and mughal rulers was called muslim rule, even though the muslim masses were as poor and oppressed by taxes as the hindu masses, and even though both were looked down upon by tbe rulers, nobles, chiefs, and zamindars, whether hindu or muslim, with contempt and regarded as low creatures, yet these writers declared that all muslims were rulers in medieval india and all non muslims were the ruled.
they failed to bring out the fact that ancient and medieval politics in india, as politics everywhere else, were based on economic and political interests and not on religious considerations.
rulers as well as rebels used religious appeals as an outer colouring to disguise the play of material interests add ambitions.
moreover, the british and communal historians attacked the notion of a composite culture in india.
undoubtedly, there existed a diversity of cultures in india.
but this diversity did not prevail on a religious basis.
the people of a region as well as the upper and lower classes within a region tended to have common cultural patterns.
yet the communal historians asserted that there existed distinct hindu and muslim cultures in india.
even though the cominunal view of politics and culture was unscientific and was largely the product of reactionary thinking and british tactics, it played upon the fears which ame naturally to a minority.
in such a situation wisdom dictated that every step be taken to remove the genuine fears of the minority that the majority might use the force of its numbers to injure the minority.
the best remedy here was the outlook and behaviour of the religious majority.
its actions had to help the minority to realise two things 1 that its religion and particular social and cultural traits, would be safe 2 and that religion should not and would not be a factor in determining economic and political policies.
this was fully recognised by the founding fathers of indian nationalism who realised that the welding of indians into a single nation would be a gradual and hard task, requiring prolonged political education of the people.
they therefore set out to convince the minorities that the nationalist movement would carefully protect their religious and social rights white uniting all indians in their common national, economic and political interests.
in his presidential address to the national congress of 1886, dadabhai had given the clear assurance that the congress would take up only national questions and would not deal with religious and social matters.
in 1889 the congress adopted the principle that it would not take up any proposal which was considered harmful to the muslims by a majority of the muslim delegates to ihe congress.
many muslims joined the congress in its early years.
in other words the early nationalists tried to modernise the political outlook of the people by teaching that politics should not be based on religion and community.
nationalist movement 19051918 251 unfortunately, while militant nationalism was a great step forward in every other respect, it was a step back in respect of the growth of national unity.
the speeches and writings of some of the militant nationalists had a strong religious, and hindu tinge, they emphasised ancient indian culture to the exclusion of medieval indian culture.
they identified indian culture and the indian nation with the hindu religion and hindus.
they tried to abandon elements of composite culture.
for example, tilakb propagation of the shivaji and ganapati festivals, aurobindo ghoses semimystical concept of india as mother and nationalism as a religion, the terrorists oaths before goddess kali, and tfte initiation of the anti partition agitation with dips in the ganga could hardly appeal to the muslims.
in fact, such actions were against the spirit of their religion, and they could not be expected as muslims to associate with these and other similar activities.
nor could muslims be expected to respond with full enthusiasm when they saw shivaji or pratap being hailed not merely for their historical roles but also as national leaders who fought against the foreigners.
by no definition could akbar or aurangzeb be declared a foreigner, unless being a muslim was made the ground for declaring one a foreigner.
in reality, the struggle between pratap and akbar or shivaji and aurangzeb had to be viewed as a political struggle in its particular historical setting.
to declare akbar or aurangzeb a foreigner and pratap or shivaji a national hero was to project into past history the communal outlook of 20th century india.
this was not only bad history but was also a blow to national unity.
this does not mean that militant nationalists were antimuslim or even wholly communal.
par from it.
most of them, including tilak, favoured hindumuslim unity.
to most of them, the motherland, or bharatmata.
was a modem notion, being in no way linked with religion.
most of them were modern in their political thinking and not backward looking.
economic boycott, their chief political weapon, was indeed very modern as also their political organisation.
even the revolutionary terrorists were in reality inspired by european revolutionary movements, for example, those of ireland, russia, and italy, rather than by kali or bhawani cults.
but, as pointed out earlier, there was a certain hindu tinge in the political work and ideas of the militant nationalists.
this proved to be particularly harmful as clever british and probritish propagandists toolc advantage of the hindu colouring to poison tbe minds of the muslims.
the result was that a large number of educated muslims either remained aloof from the rising nationalist movement or became hostile to it, thus falling an easy prey to a separatist outlook.
even so, quite a large number of advanced muslim intellectuals such s the banister abdul rasul and hasrat mohani joined the swadeshi movement and muhammed ali jinnah became one of the leading younger leaders of the national congress.
the economic backwardness of the country also contributed to the rise of communalism.
due to the lack of modem industrial development unemployment was an acute problem in india, especially for the educated.
there was in consequence an intense competition for existing jobs.
the farsighted indians 252 modern india nagnosed the disease and worked for an economic and political system in which the country would develop economically and in which, therefore, employment would be plentiful.
howevef, many others thought of such shortsighted and shortterm remedies as communal, provincial, or caste reservation in jobs.
they aroused communal and religious and later caste and provincial passions in an attempt to get a larger share of the existing, limited employment opportunities.
to those looking desperately for employment such a narrow appeal had a certain immediate attraction.
in this situation, hindu and muslim communal leaders, caste leaders, and the officials following the policy of divide and rule were able to achieve some success.
many hindus began to talk of hindu nationalism and many muslims of muslim nationalism.
the politically immature people failed to realise that their economic, educational, and cultural difficulties were the result of common subjection to foreign rule and of economic backwardness and that only through.common effort could they free their country, develop it economically, and thus solve the underlying common problems, such as unemployment.
the separatist and loyalist tendencies among a section of the educated muslims and the big muslim nawabs and landlords reached a climax in 1906 when the au india muslim league was founded under the leadership of the aga khan, the nawab of dacca, and nawab mohsinulmulk.
the muslim league supported the partition of bengal and demanded special safeguards for the muslims in government services.
later, with the help of lord minto, the viceroy, it put forward and secured the acceptance of the demand for separate electorates.
thus, .while the national congress was taking up antiimperialist economic and political issues, the muslim league and its reactionary leaders preached that the interests of the muslims were different from those of the hindus.
the muslim leagues politicalactivities were directed not against thejo reign rulers but against the hindus and the national congress.
hereafter, the league began to oppose every nationalist and democratic demand of the congress.
it thus played into the hands of the british who announced that they would protect the special interests of the muslims.
the league soon became one of the main instruments with which the british hoped to fight the rising nationalist movement.
to increase its usefulness, the british also encouraged the muslim league to approach the muslim masses and to assume their leadership.
it is true that the nationalist movement was also dominated at this time by the eduoated town dwellers, but, in its antiimperialism, it was representing the interests of all indianarich or poor, hindus or muslims.
on the other hand, ihe muslim league and its upper class leaders had little, in common with the interests of the muslim masses, who were suffering as much as the hindu masses at the hands of foreign imperialism.
this basic weakness of the league came to be increasingly recognised by the patriotic muslims.
the educated muslim young men were, in particular, attracted by radical nationalist ideas.
the militantly nationalist ahrar movement was founded at this time under the leadership of maulana mohammed ali, hakim nationalist movement 19051918 253 ajmal khan, hasan imam, maulana zafar ali khan, and mazharulhaq, these young men disliked the loyalist politics of the aligarh school and the big nawabs and zamindars.
moved by modern ideas of selfgovernment, they advocated active participation in the militant nationalist movement.
similar nationalist sentiments were arising among a section of the traditional muslim scholars led by the deoband school.
the most prominent of these scholars was the young maulana abul kalam azad, who was educated at the famous a1 azhar university at cairo and who propagated his rationalist and nationalist ideas in his newspaper al nllat which he brought out in 1912 at the age of 24r maulana mohammed ali, azad and other young men preached a message of courage and fearlessness and said that there was no conflict between islam and nationalism.
in 1911 war broke out between the ottoman empire turkey and italy and during 1912 and 1913 turkey had to light the balkan powers.
tbe turkish ruler claimed at this time to be also the caliph or religious head of all muslims moreover, nearly all of the muslim holy places wen situated within the turkish empire.
a wave of sympathy for turkey swept india.
a medical mission, headed by dr. m.a.
ansari, was sent to help turkey.
since britains policy during the balkan war and after was not sympathetic to turkey, the proturkey and procaliph or khiafat sentiments tended to become antiimperialist.
in fact for several yearsfrom 1912 to 1924the loyalists among the muslim leaguers were completely overshadowed by nationalist young men.
unfortunately, with the exception of a few perons like azad who were rationalists in their thinking, most of the militant nationalists among muslim young men also did not fully accept the modern secular approach to politics.
the result was that the most important issue they took up was not political independence but protection of the holy places and of the turkish empire.
instead pf understanding and opposing the economic and political consequences of imperialism, they fought imperialism on s ground that it threatened the caliph and the holy places.
even their sympathy for turkey was on religious grounds.
their political appeal was to religious sentiments.
moreover, the heroes and myths and cultural traditions they appealed to belonged not to ancient or medieval indian history but to west asian history.
it is true that this approach did not immediately clash with indian nationalism.
rather, it made its adherents and supporters antiimperialist and encouraged the nationalist trend among urban muslims.
but in the long run this approach too proved harmful, as it encouraged the habit of looking at political questions from a religious view point.
in any case, such political activity did not pyomote among the muslim masses a modern, secuaiapproach towards political and economic questions.
even though no organised party of hindu communalists was formed in this period, hindu communal ideas also arose.
many hindu writers and political workers echoed the ideas and programme of the muslim league.
they talked of hindu nationalism.
they declared that muslima were 254 modern india foreigners in tndia, they also carried on a regular agitation for hindu share of seats in legislatures and municipal councils sind in government jobs.
the nationalists and the first world war in june 1914, the first world war broke out between great britain, france, italy, russia, japan and the united states of america on one side and germany, austriahungary, and turkey on the other.
we have already seen in chapter x that the industrialised capitalist countries of the world had begun to compete in, and struggle for, the possession of exclusive markets and colonies in the sccond half of the 19th century.
by the beginning of the 20th century, this struggle had become very intense and bitter as the area of the world still available for conquest began to shrink.
those powers, such as germany and italy, which had arrived late on the world scene and had therefore not been able to grab as much as the early starters, such as britain and france, now demanded a redivision of the colonies.
they were willing to seek such a redivision by  force.
every major country of the world now began to prepare for a possible war to retain its possessions or to acquire fresh ones.
the  opening years of the 20th century witnessed a 6erce armament race among the powers.
the people of these countries got emotionally involved in the struggle for colonies as they were told by their rulers that the prestige, power, and fame of a nation depended on the extent of its colonial possessions.
jineoisl newspaper served as the main vehicle for such propaganda.
thus, for example, the british felt proud of the fact that the sun never sets on the british fmpire, while the germans clamoured for a place in the sun.
afraid of being politically and militarily isolated by its rivals, every county sought alliances with other countries.
very soon, the powers got divided into hostile sets of alliances or power blocs.
finally, the war started in august 1914, world politics now began to change rapidly.
in india the years of war marked the maturing of nationalism.
in the beginning, the indian nationalist leaders, including lokamanya tilak, who had been released in june 1914, decided to support the war nationalist moyfmfnr 59051918 255 elfoit of the government.
this was not done out of a sense of loyalty or sympathy with the british cause.
as jawaharlal nehru lias painted out in his autobiography.
there was little sympathy with the british in spile of loud professions of loyalty.
moderate and extremist alike learnt with satisfaction of german victories.
were was nc love for germany of course, only the desire to sec oiu1 rulers humbled.
the nationalists adopted an actively pro bi itisk attitude mainly in the mistaken belief that grateful britain won id repay indias loyalty with gratitude and enable india to take a long step forward on the road to selfgovernment.
they did not realise fully that the different powers were lighting the first world war precisely to safeguard their existing colonies.
the home rule leagues at the same time, many indian leaders saw clearly that the government was not likely to give any real concessions unless popular pressure was brought to bear upon it.
hence, a real mass political movement was necessary.
some other factors were leading the nationalist movement in the same direction.
the world war, involviag mutual struggle between the imperialist powers of europe, destroyed the myth of the racial superiority of the western nations over the asian peoples.
moreover the war led to increased misery among the poorer classes of indians, for them the war had meant heavy taxation and soaring pfic9 of the daily necessities of life.
they were getting ready to join any militant movement of protest.
consequently, the war years were years of intense nationalist political agitation.
but this mass agitation coiild not be carried out under the leadership of the indian national congress, which had become, under moderate leadership, a passive and inert political organisation with no political work among the people to its credit.
therefore, two home rule leagues were started ill 1915 16, one under the leadership of lokamanya tilak and the other under ihe leadership of annie besant, and s. subra maniya iyer.
the two home rule leagues carried out intense propaganda all over the country in favour of the demand for the grant of home rule or selfgovernment to india after the war, ft was during this agitation that tilak gave the popular slogan home .rule fe my birthright, and i will have it.
the t wo leagues made rapid progress and the cry of home rule resounded throughout the length and breadth of india.
the war period also witnessed the growth of the revolutionary movement.
the terrorist groups spread from bengal and maharashtra to the whole of northern india.
moreover, many indians began to plan a violent rebellion to overthrow british rule.
indian revolutionaries in the united states of america and canada had established the ghadar rebellion party in 1913. while mcst of the members of the party were sikh peasants and soldiers,their leaders were mostly educated hindus or muslims.
the party bad active members in other countries such as mexico, japan, china, philippines, malaya, singapore, thailand, indochina and east and south africa.
the ghadar party was pledged to wage revolutionary war against the british in india as soon as the first world war broke out in 1914, the ghadarites decided to send arms and men to india to start an uprising with the help of soldiers and local revolutionaries.
several thousand men volunteered to go back to india.
millions of dollars were contributed to pay for their expenses.
many gave their lifelong savings and sold their lands and other property.
the ghadarites also contacted indian soldiers in the far east, southeast asia and all over india and persuaded several regiments to 256 modern india rebel.
finally, 21 february 1915 was fixed as the date for an armed revolt in the punjab.
unfortunately, the authorities came to know of these plans and took immediate action.
the rebellious regiments were disbanded and their leaders were either imprisoned or hanged.
for example, 12 men of the 23rd cavalry were executed.
the leaders and members of the ghadar party m the punjab were arrested on a mass scale and tried.
42 of them were hanged, 114 were transported for life, and 93 were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment.
many of them, after their release, founded the kirti and communist movements in the punjab.
some of the prominent ghadar leaders were baba gurmukh singh, kartar smgh saraba, sohan singh bhakna, rahmat ali shah, bhai parmanand, and mohammad barkatullah.
inspired by the ghadar party, 700 men of the 5th light infantry at singapore revolted under the leadership of jamadar chisti khan and subedar dundey khan.
they were crushed after a bitter battle in which many died.
thirtyseven others were publicly executed, while 41 were transported for life.
other revolutionaries were active in india and abroad.
in 1915, during an unsuccessful revolutionary attempt, jatin mukerjea popularly known as bagha jatin gave his life fighting a battle with the police at balasore.
rash bihari bose, raja mahendra pratap, lala hardayat, abdul rahim, maulana obaidullah sindhi, champak raman pillai, sardar singh rana, and madam cama were some of the prominent indians who .
carried on revolutionary activities and propaganda outside india.
lucknow session of the congress 1916 the nationalists soon saw that disunity in their ranks was injuring their cause and that they must put up a united front before the govern e growing nationalist feeling in the country and the urge for inity produced two historic developments at the lucknow the indian national congress in 1916. firstly, the two wings ngress were reunited.
the old controversies had lost their nd the split in the congress had not benefited either group, of all the rising tide of nationalism compelled the old leaders e back into the congress lokamanya tilak and other militant s. the lucknow congress was the first united congress f, at lucknow, the congress and the all india muslim league old differences and put up common political demands before the it.
while the war and the two home rule leagues were new sentiment in the country and changing the character of ess, the muslim league had also been undergoing gradual we have already noted earlier that the younger section of the vluslims was turning to bolder nationalist politics.
the war nessed further developmnents in that direction.
consequently, lie government suppressed the alhila of abul kalam azad omrade of maulana mohammed ali.
tt also interned the ali maulanas mohammed ali and shaukat ali, hasrat mohani, kalam azad.
the league reflected, at least partially, the lilitancy of its younger members.
it gradually began to out imited political outlook of the aligarh school of thought and irer to the policies of the congress.
ty between the congress and the league was brought about ning of the congress nationalist movement 19051918 257 league pact, known popularly as the pact.
an important role in bringing the two together was lokamanya tilak.
the two organisations passed the same i at their sessions, put forward a joint scheme of political reforms eparate electorates, and demanded that the british government ke a declaration that it would confer self government on india  date.
the lucknow pact marked an important step forward muslim unity.
unfortunately, it was based on the notion of dgether the educated hindus and muslim as separate entities ords without secularisation of their political outlook which ke them realise that in politics they had no separate interests or muslims.
the lucknow pact, therefore, left the way open ire resurgence of communalism in indian politics, immediate effect of the developments at lucknow was tremen e unity between the moderate nationalists and the militant s and between the national congress and the muslim league reat political enthusiasm in the country.
even the british nt felt it necessary to placate the nationalists.
hitherto it had relied heavily on repression to quieten the nationalist agitation.
large numbers of radical nationalists and revolutionaries had been jailed or interned under the notorious defence of india act and other similar regulations.
it now decided to appease nationalist opinion and announced on 20 august 1917 that its policy in india was the gradual development of self governing institutions with a view to the progressive realisation of responsible government of india as an integral part of the british empire.
and in july 1918 the montaguechelmsford reforms were announced.
but indian nationalism was not appeased.
in fact, the indian national movement was soon to enter its third and last phase the era of struggle or the gandhian era.
exercises 1. how would you explain the growth of militant nationalism or extremism in the beginning of the 20th ccntury 2. in what way did the militant nationalists differ from the moderates how far were they successful in realising their political objectives 3. trace the course of the swadeshi and boycott movement.
4. examine critically the important factors which were responsible for the growth of commnnalism in india in the early part of the 20th century.
bring out clearly the role of the british policy of divide and rule, the educational and economic backwardness of the muslim upper and middle classes, the teaching of indian history, the militant nationalism and the economic backwardness of the country.
258 modern india 5. write short notes on a lokamanya tilak, b growth of revolutionary terrorism, c the surat split, d the morleyminto reforms, e muslim league, f the growth of militant nationalism among the muslims, g the first world war, h the home rule leagues, t the ghadar party, j the lucknow pact.
chapter xv struggle for swaraj s we have seen in the previous chapter, a new political situation was maturing during the war years, 191418. nationalism had gathered its forces and the nationalists were expecting major political gains after the war and they were willing to fight back if their expectations were thwarted.
the economic situation in the postwar years had taken a turn for the worse.
there was first a rise in prices and then a depression in economic activity.
indian industries,which had prospered during the war because foreign imports of manufactured goods had ceased, now faced losses and closure.
the indian industrialists wanted protection of their industries through imposition of high customs duties and grant of government aid they realised that a strong nationalist movement and an independent indian government alone could secure these.
the workers, facing unemployment and high prices and living in great poverty, also turned actively towards the nationalist movement.
indian soldiers, returned from their triumphs in africa, asia and europe, imparted some of their confidence and their knowledge of the wide world to the rural areas.
thepeasantiy, groaning under deepening poverty and high taxation, was waiting for a lead.
the urban, educated indians faced increasing unemployment.
thus all sections of indian society were suffering economic hardships.
the international situation was also favourable to the resurgence of nationalism.
the first world war gave a tremendous impetus to nationalism all over asia and africa.
in order to win popular support for their war effort, the allied nations britain, the united states, france, italy, and japanpromised a new era of democracy and national selfdetermination to all the peoples of ihe world.
but after their victory, they showed little willingness to end the colonial system.
on the epntrary, at the paris peace conference, and in the different peace settlements, all the wartime promises were forgotten and, in fact, betrayed.
the excolonies of the defeated powers, germany and turkey, in africa, west asia, and east asia were divided among the victorious powers.
the people of asia and africa were suddenly plunged from high hopes into deep despair.
militant, disillusioned nationalism began to arise.
a 262 modern india another major consequence of the world war was the erosion of the white mans prestige.
the european powers had from the beginning of their imperialism utilised the notion of racial and cultural superiority to maintain their supremacy.
but during the war, both sides carried on intense propaganda against each other, exposing the opponents brutal and uncivilised colonial record.
naturally, the people of the colonies tended to believe both sides and to lose their awe of the white mails superiority.
a major impetus to the national movements was given by the impact of the russian revolution.
on 7 november 1917, the bolshevik communist party, led by v.i lenin, overthrew the czarist regime in russia and declared the formation of the first socialist state, the soviet union, in the history of the world.
the new soviet regime electrified the colonial world by unilaterally renouncing its imperialist rights in china and other parts of asia, by granting the right of self determination to the former czarist colonies in asia, and by giving an equal status to the asian nationalities within its border which had been oppressed as inferior and conquered people by the previous regime.
the russian revolution brought home to the colonial people the important lesson that immense strength and energy resided in the common people.
it was the common people who had not only overthrown the mighty czarist government, the most despotic and one of the most militarily powerful regimes of the day, but also defended the consequent military intervention against the revolution by britain, france the united states, and japan.
if the russian czar could be toppled, then no regime was invincible.
if the unarmed peasants and workers could carry out a revolution against their domestic tyrants, then the people of the subject nations need not despair they too could fight for their independence provided they were equally well united, organised, and determined to fight for freedom.
thus the russian revolution gave people selfconfidence and indicated to the leaders of the national movement that they should rely on the strength of the common people.
bipin chandra pal, for example, wrote id 1919 today after the downfall of german militarism, after the destruction of the autocracy of the czar, there has grown up all over the world a new power, the power of the people determined to rescue their legitimate rightsthe right to live freely and happily without being exploited and victimised by the wealthier and the so called higher classes.
the nationalist movement in india was also affcctcd by the fact that the rest of the afroasian world was also convulsed by nationalist agitations after the war.
nationalism surged forward not only in india but also in turkey, the arab countries of northern africa and west asia, iran, afghanistan, burma, malaya, indonesia, indochina, the philippines, china and korea.
the government, aware of the lising tide of nationalist and anti government sentiments, once again decided to follow the policy of the carrot and the stick, in other words, of concessions and repression.
struggle for swaraj 263 the montaguobelmsford reforms in 1918, edwin montagu, the secretary of state, and lord chelmsford, the viceroy, produced their scheme of constitutional reforms which led to the enactment of the government of india act of 1919. the provincial legislative councils were enlarged and the majority of their members were to be elected.
the provincial governments were given more powers under the system of dyarchy.
under this system some subjects, such as finance and law and order, were called reserved subjects and remained under the direct control of the governor others such as education, public health, and local selfgovernment, were called transferred subjects and were to be controlled by ministers responsible to the legislatures.
this also meant that while some of the spending departments were transferred, the governor retained complete control over the finances.
the governor could, moreover, overrule the ministers on any grounds that he considered special.
at the centre, there were to be two houses of legislature, the lower house, the legislative assembly, was to have 41 nominated members in a total strength of 144. the upper house, the council of state, was to have 26 nominated and 34 elected members.
the legislature had virtually no control over the governor general and his executive council.
on the other hand, the central government had unrestricted control over the provincial governments.
moreover the right to vote was severely restricted.
in 1920, the total number of voters was 909,874 for the lower house and 17,364 for the upper house.
indian nationalists had, however, advanced far beyond such halting concessions.
they were no longer willing to let an alien government decide their fitness for selfgovernment, nor would they be satisfied with the shadow of political pover.
the indian national congress met in a special session at bombay in august 1918 under the presidentship of hasan imam to consider the reform proposals.
it condemned them as disappointing and unsatisfactory and demanded effective selfgovernment instead.
some of the veteran congress leaders led by surendranath banerjea were in favour of accepting the government proposals and left the congress at this time.
they refused to attend the bombay session, where they would have formed an insignificant minority, and founded the indian liberal federation.
they came to be known as liberals and played a minor role in indian politics hereafter.
264 modern india the rowlntt act while trying to appease indians, the government of india was ready with repression.
throughout the war, repression of nationalists had continued.
the terroiists and revolutionaries had been hunted down, hanged, and imprisoned.
many other nationalists such as abul kalam azad had also been kept behind the bars.
the government now decided to arm itself with more farreaching powers, which went against the accepted principles of rule of law, to be able to suppress those nationalists who would refuse to be satisfied with the official reforms.
in march 1919 it passed the rriwlatt act even though every single indian member of the central legislative council opposed it.
three of them, mojiommed ali jinnah, madan mohan malaviya and mazharulhuq resigned their membership of the council.
this act authorised the government to imprison any person without trial and conviction in a court of law.
the act would thus also enable the government to suspend the right of habeas corpus which had been the foundation of civil liberties in britain.
mahatma gandhi assumes leadership the rowlatt act came like a sudden blow.
to the people of india, promised extension of democracy during the war, the government step appeared to be a cruel joke.
it was like a hungry man being offered stones.
instead of democratic progress had come further restriction of civil liberties.
people felt humiliated and were filled with anger.
unrest spread in the country and a powerful agitation against the act arose.
during this agitation, a new leader, mohandas karamchand gandhi, took command of the nationalist movement.
the third, and the decisive, phase of indian nationalism now began.
tiandhiji and his ideas m.k, gandhi was born struggle for swaraj 265 on 2 october 1869 at porbandar in gujarat.
after getting his legal education in britain, he went to south africa to practise law.
imbued with a high sense of justice, be was revolted by the .injustice, discrimination, and degradation to which indians liad to submit in the south african colonies.
indian labourers who had gone to south africa, and the merchants who followed were denied the right to vote.
they had to register and pay a polltax.
they could not reside except in prescribed locations which were insanitary and congested.
in some of the south african colonics, the asians, as also the africans, could not stay out of doors after 9 p.m. nor could they use public footpaths.
gandhi soon became the leader of the struggle against these conditions and during 189394 was engaged in a heroic though unequal struggle against the racist authorities of south africa.
it was during this long struggle lasting nearly two decades that lie evolved the technique of satyagraha based on truth and nonviolence.
the ideal satyagrahi was to be truthful and perfectly peaceful, but at the same time he would refuse to submit to what he considered wrong.
he would accept suffering willingly in the course of struggle against the wrongdoer.
this struggle was to be part of his love of truth.
but even while resisting evil, he would love the evildoer.
hatred would be alien to the nature of a true satyagrahi.
he would, moreover, be utterly fearless.
he would never bow down before evil whatever the consequence.
in gandhis eyes, nonviolence was not a weapon of the weak and the cowardly.
only the strong and the brave could practise it.
even violence was preferable to cowardice.
in a famous article in bis weekly journal, young india, he wrote in 1920 that nonviolence is the law of our species, as violence is the law of the brute, but that where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, i would advise violence i would rather have india resort to arms in order to defend her honour, than that she should, in a cowardly manner, become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour.
he once summed up his entire philosophy of life as follows the only virtue i want to claim ft truth and nonviolence.
i lay no claim to super human powers i want none.
another important aspect of gandhis outlook was that he would not separate thought and practice, belief and action.
his truth and nonviolence were meant for daily living and not merely for high sounding speeches and writings.
gandhi returned to india in 1915 at the age of 46. he was keen to serve his country and his people.
he first decided to study indian conditions before deciding the field of his work.
in 1916 he founded the sabarmati ashram at ahmedabad where his friends and followers were to learn and practise the ideals of truth and nonviolence.
champaran satyagraha 19x7 gandhis first great experiment in satyagraha came in 1917 in champaran, a district in bihar.
the peasantry on the indigo plantations in the district was excessively oppressed by the european planters.
tliey were compelled to grow indigo on at least 320th of their land and to sell it at prices fixed by the planters.
similar conditions had prevailed earlier in bengal, but as a result of a major uprising during 185961 the peasants there had won their freedom from the indigo planters.
266 modern india having heard of gandhis campaigns in south africa, several peasants of champaran invited him to come and help them.
accompanied by babu rajendra prasad, mazharulhuq, jb.
kripalam, and mahadev desai, gandhi reached champaran in 1917 and began to conduct a detailed inquiry into the condition of the peasantry.
the infuriated district officials ordered him to leave champaran, but he defied the order and was willing to face trial and imprisonment, this forced the government to cancel ts earlier order and to appoint a committee of inquiry on which gandhi served as a member.
ultimately, the disabilities from which the peasantry was suffering were reduced and gandhi had won his first battle of civil disobedience in india.
he had also had a glimpse into the naked poverty in which the peasants of india lived.
ahmedabad mill strike in 1918, mahatma gandhi intervened in a dispute between the workers and millowners of ahmedabad.
he undertook a fast unto death to force a compromise.
the millowuers relented on the fourth day and agreed to give the workers 35 per cent increase in wages.
he also supported the peasants of khaira in gujarat in their struggle against the collection of land revenue when their crops had failed.
sardar vallabhbhai patel left his lucrative practice at the bar at this time to help gandhi.
these experiences brought gandhi in close contact with the masses whose interests he actively expoused all his life.
in fact he was the first indian nationalist leader who identified his life and his manner of living vith the life of the common people.
in time he became the symbol of poor india, nationalist india, and rebellious india, three other causes were very dear to gandhis heart.
the first was hindumuslim unity the second, the fight against untouchability, and the third, the raising of the social status of women in the country.
he once summed up his aims as follows i shall work for an india in which the poorest shall feel that it is their country, in whose making they have an effective voice, an india in which there shall be no high class and low class of people, an india in which all communities shall live in perfect harmony.
..there can be no room in such an india for the curse of untouchability.. .women will enioy the same rights as men.. .this is the india of my dreams.
though a devout hindu, gandhis cultural and religious outlook was uniyersalist and not narrow.
indian culture, he wrote,  is neither hindu, islamic, nor any other, wholly.
it is a fusion of all.
he wanted indians to have deep roots in their own culture but at the same time to acquire the best that other world cultures had to offer.
he said i want the culture of all lands to be blown about my house as freely as possible.
but i refuse to be blown off my feet by any.
i refuse to live m other peoples houses as an interloper, a beggar or a slave.
satyagraha against the rowlatt act along with other nationalists, gandhi was also aroused by the rowlatt act.
in february 1919, he founded the satyagraha sabha whose members took a pledge to disobey the act and thus to court arrest and imprisonment.
here was a new method of struggle.
the nationalist movement, whether under moderate or struggle for swaraj 267 extremist leadership, had hitherto confined its struggle to agitation.
big meetings and demonstrations, resfusal to cooperate with the government, boycott of foreign cloth and schools, or individual acts of terrorism were the only forms of political work known to the nationalists.
satyagraha immediately raised the movement to a new higher level.
nationalists could now act in place of giving only verbal expression to their dissatisfaction and anger.
the national congress was now to become an organisation for political action.
it was, moreover, to rely increasingly on the political support of the poor.
gandhi asked the nationalist workers to go to the villages.
that is where india lives, he said.
he increasingly turned the the face of nationalism towards the common man and the symbol of this transformation was to be khadi, or hand spun and handwoven cloth, which soon became the uniform of the nationalists.
he spun daily to emphasise the dignity of labour and the value of selfreliance, indias salvation would come, he said, when the masses were wakened from their sleep and became active in politics.
and the people responded magnificently to gandhis call.
march and april 1919 witnessed a remarkable political awakening in tndia.
there were hartals, strikes, and demonstrations.
the slogans of hindumuslim unity filled the air.
the entire country was electrified.
the indian people were no longer willing to submit to the degradation of foreign rule.
jallianwalla bagh massacre the government was determined to suppress the mass agitation.
it repeatedly lathicharged and fired upon unarmed demonstrators at bombay, ahmedabad, calcutta, delhi and other cities.
gandhiji gave a call for a mighty hartal on 6 april 1919. the people responded with unprecedented enthusiasm.
the government decided to meet the popular protest with repression, particularly in the punjab.
at this time was perpetrated one of the worst political crimes in modern histroy.
an unarmed but large crowd had gathered on 13 april 1919 at amritsar 268 modern india in the punjab in the jallianwalla bagh, to protest against the arrest of their popular leaders, dr. saifuddin kitchlu and dr. satyapal.
general dyer, the military commander of amritsar, decided to terrorise the people of amritsar into complete submission.
jallianwala bagh was a large open space which was enclosed on three aides by buildings and had only one exit.
he surrounded the bagh garden with his army unit, closed the exist with his troops, and then ordered his men to shoot into the trapped crowd with rifles and machineguns.
they fired till their ammu nition was exhausted.
thousands were killed and wounded, after this massacre, martial law was proclaimed throughout the punjab and the people were submitted to most uncivilised atrocities, j a liberal lawyer, sivaswamy aiyer, who had received a knightutrndtrom the government, wrote as follows on the punjab atrocities the wholesale slaughter of hundreds of unarmed men of jallianwala bagh without giving the crowd an opportunity to disperse, the indifferences of general dyer to the condition of hundreds of people who were wounded in the cling, the firing of machineguns into crowds who had dispersed and taken to their heels, the flogging of men in public, the order compelling thousands of students to walk 16mics a day for rollcalls, the arrest and detention of .sco students and professors, the compelling of school children of 5 to 7 to attend on parade to salute the flag... the flogging of a marriage party, the censorship of mails, the closures of he badshahi mosque for six weeks, the arrest and detention of people without any substantial reasons., the flogging of six of the hipest boys in the islamiah school simply because they happened to be schoi1 , s and to be big boys, the construction of an open cage for the confinement ui .irrested persons, the invention of novel punishments like the crawling order, the skipping order and others unknown to any system of law, civil or military, the handcuffing and roping together of persons and keeping them in open jallianwalla bagh courtesy nehru memorial museum and library struggle for swaraj 269 trucks for fifteen hours, the use of aeroplanes and lewis guns and the latest paraphernalia of scientific warfare against unarmed citizens, the taking of hostages and the confiscation and destruction of property for the purposes of securing the attendance of absentees, the handcuffing of hindus and muhammadans in pairs with the object of demonstrating the consequences of hindumuslim unity, the cutting off of electric and water supplies from indians houses, the removal of fans from indian houses and giving them for use by europeans, the commandeering of all vehicles owned by indians and giving them to europeans for use.
..these are some of the many incidents of the administration of martial law, which created a reign of terror in the punjab and have shocked the public a wave of horror ran through the country as the knowledge of the unjab happenings spread.
people saw as if in a flash the ugliness and brutality that lay behind the facade of civilisation that imperialism and foreign rule professed.
popular shock was expressed by the great poet and humanist rabindranath tagore who renounced his knighthood in declared the time has conic when badges of honour make our shame glaring m their in congruous context of humiliation, and, i, for my part, wish to stand, shorn of all special distinctions, by the side of my countrymen who, for their socalled insignificance, are liable to suffer degradation not fit for human beings.
the khilafat and noncooperation movement 191922 a new stream came into lhe nationalist movement with the kmafat movement.
we have seen earlier that the younger generation of educated muslims and a section of traditional divines and theologians had been growing more and more radical and nationalist.
the ground for common political action by hindus and muslims had already been prepared by the lucknow pact.
the nationalist agitation against the rowlatt act had touched all the indian people alike and brought hindns and muslims together in political agitation.
for example, as if to declare before the world the principle of hindu muslim unity in political action, swami shradhanand, a staunch arya samaj leader, was asked by the muslims to preach from the pulpit of the jama masjid at delhi while dr. kitchlu, a muslim, was given the keys of the golden temple, the sikh shrine at amritsar.
at amritsar, such political unity had been brought about by governmental repression.
hindus and muslims were handcuffed together, made to crawl together, and drink water together, when ordinarily a hindu would not drink water from the hands of a muslim.
in this atmosphere, the nationalist trend among the muslims took the form of the khilafat agitation.
the poli tic allyconscious muslims were critical of the tfeatment meted out to the ottoman or turkish empire by britain and its allies who had partitioned it and taken away thrace from turkey proper.
this was m violation of the earlier pledge of the british premier, lloyd george, who had declared nor are we fighting to deprive turkey of the rich and renowned c 270 modern india lands of asia minor and thrace which are predominantly turkish in race.
the muslims also felt that the position of the sultan of turkey, who was also regarded by many as the caliph or the religious head of the muslims, should not be undermined.
a khilafat committee was soon formed under the leadership of the ali brothers, maulana azad, hakim ajmal khan, and hasrat mohani, and a country wide agitation was organised.
the allindia khilafat conference held at delhi in november 1919 decided to withdraw all cooperation from the government if their demands were not met.
the muslim league, now under the leadership of nationalists, gave full support to the national congress and its agitation on political issues.
on their part, the congress leaders, including lokamanya tilak and mahatma gandhi, viewed the khilafat agitation as a golden opportunity for cementing hindumuslim unity and bringing the muslim masses into the national movement.
they realised that different sections of the peoplehindus, muslims, sikhs and christians, capitalists and workers, peasants and artisans, women and youth, and tribes and peoples of different regionswould come into the national movement through the experience of fighting for their own different demands and seeing that the alien regime stood in opposition to them, gandhi looked upon the khilafat agitation as an opportunity of uniting hindus and mohammedans as would not arise in a hundred years.
early in 1920 he declared that the khilafat question overshadowed that of the constitutional reforms and the punjab wrongs and announced that he would lead a movement of noncooperation if the terms of peace with turkey did not satisfy the indian muslims.
in fact, very soon gandhi became one of the leaders of the khilafat movement.
meanwhile the government had refused to annul the rowlatt act, make amends for the atrocities in the punjab, or satisfy the nationalist urge for self government.
in june 1920, an ailparty conference met at allahabad and approved a programme of boycott of schools, colleges, and law courts.
the khilafat committee launched a noncoopera tion movement on 31 august 1920. gandhi was the first to join i and ho returned the kaiserihind medal awarded to him earlier for services during the war.
the congress met in spccial session in september 1920 at calcutta.
only a few weeks earlier it had suffered a grievous losslokamanya tilak had passed away on 1 august at the age or 64, but his place was soon taken by gandhiji, c.r.
das, and motilal nehru.
the congress supported gandhis plan for noncooperation with the government till the punjab and khilafat wrongs were removed and swaraj established.
the people were asked to boycott government educational institutions, law courts, and legislatures and to practise handspinning and hand weaving for producing khadi.
this decision to defy in a most peaceful manner the government and its laws was endorsed at the annual session of the congress held at nagpur in december 1920, the british people will have to beware, declared gandhi at nagpur, that if they do not struggle for swaraj 271 want to do justice, it will be the bounden duty of every indian to destroy the empire.
the nagpur session also made changes in the constitution of the congress.
provincial congress committees were reorganised on the basis of linguistic areas.
the congress was now to be led by a working committee of 15 members, including the president and the secretaries.
this would enable the congress to function as a continuous political organisation and would provide it with the machinery for implementing its resolutions.
congress membership was thrown open to all men and women of the age of 21 or more on payment of 4 annas as annual subscription.
in 1921 the age limit for membership was reduced to 18. the congress now changed its charactcr.
it became the organiser and leader of the masses ir their national struggle for freedom from foreign rule.
there was a general feelings of exhilaration.
political freedom mrght come years later but the people had begun to shake off their slavish mentality.
it was as if thevery air that india breathed had changed.
the joy and the enthusiasm of those days was something special, for the sleeping giant was beginning to awake.
moreover, hindus and muslims were marching together shoulder to shoulder.
at the same time, some of the older leaders now left the congress.
they did not like the new turn the national movement had taken.
they still believed in the traditional methods of agitation and political work which were strictly confincd within the four walls of the law.
they opposed the organisation of the masses, hartals, strikes, satyagraha, breaking of laws, courting of imprisonment, and other forms of militant struggle.
mohammed ali jinnah, g.s.
khaparde, bipin chandra pal, and annie besant were among the prominent leaders who left the congress c.r.
du, n.c. kelkr, salyamurthl and others at the time of nagpur congress in 1920. courtesy nehru memorial museum and library 272 modern india during this rrk 1. the years 1921 and 1922 were to witness an unprecedented movement of the indian people.
thousands of students left government schools sijblic meeting  and bonfire or mm omiks wili like plus il the maidti near efptiinalona millj    opp.
elptiuiitone road station .
on sunday the 9th inst, at 630 p. m. when the rewhition of the xrhl khilala conference and nrtolher cnngratulfcling ait brothers and others wiie be paitefl a lira requested lo attend in swadeshi clothes of khadl.
those who h a nol yet given away their foreign clothes ara requastad lo sand them to their respective ward congress committees lor inclusion in g r e a t b o n f i r e .
..... ...................... ............  ... .
... ........... .
...... ..... .............. a publicity poster published in the bombay chronicle of 6 october 1921 courtesy nehru memorial museum and library struggle for swaraj 273 and colleges and joined national schools and colleges, ft was at this time that the jamia millia islamia national muslim university of aligarh, the bihar yidyapith, the kashi vidyajsith.
and the gujarat vidyapith came into existence.
the jamia millia later shifted to delhi.
acharya narendra dev, dr. zakir husain, and lala lajpat rai were among the many distinguished teachers at these national colleges and universities.
hundreds of lawyers, including chittaranjan das, popu larly known as deshbandhu.
motilal nehru, and rajendra prasad, gave up their legal practice.
the tilak swarajya fund was started to finance the noncooperation movement and within six months over i crore of rupees were subscribed.
worpen showed great enthusiasm ano frely offered their jewellery.
huge bonfires of foreign cloth were organised all over the land.
kjbadi soon became a symbol of freedom.
in my 1921, the ahindia khilafat committee passed a resolution declaring that no muslim should serve in the british indian army.
tn september the ali brothers were arrested for sedition.
immediately, gandhiji gave a call for repetition of this resolution at hundreds of meetings.
fjfty members of the all india congress committee issued a similar declaration that no indian should serve a government which degraded india socially, economically, and politically.
tne congress working committee issued a similar statement.
the congress now decided to raise the movement to a higher level.
it permitted the congress committee of a province to start civil disobedience or disobedience of british laws, including nonpayment of taxes, if in its opinion the people were ready for it.
the government again took recourse to repression.
the congress and khilafat volunteers, who had begun to drill together and thus unite hindu and muslim political workers at lower levels, were declared illegal.
by the end of 1921 all important nationalist leaders, except gandhi, were behind the bars along with 3,000 others.
in november 1921 huge demonstrations greeted the prince of wales, heir to the british throne, during his tour of india.
he had been asked by the government to come to india to encourage loyalty among the people and the princes.
tn bombay, the government tried to suppress the demonstration, killing 53 persons and wounding about 400 more.
the annual session of the congress, meeting a ahmedabad in december 1921, passed a resolution affirming the fixed determination of the congress to continue the programme of nonviolent noncooperation with greater vigour than hitherto  till the punjab and khilafat wrongs ware redressed and swarajya is established, the resolution urged all indians, and in particular students, qiiietly and without any demonstration to offer themselves for arrest by belonging to the volunteer organisations.
all such satyagrahis were to take a pledge to remain nonviolent in word and deed, to promote unity among hindus, muslims, sikhs, ptfrsis, christiana, and jews, and to practise swadeshi and wear only khadi.
a hindu volunteer was also to undertake to fight actively against untouchability.
the resolution also called upon the people to organise, 274 modern india whenever possible, individual or mass civil disobedience along nonviolent lines.
the people now waited impatiently for the call for further struggle.
the movement had, moreover, spread deep among the masses.
thousands of peasants in u.p.
and bengal had responded to the call of noncoo pera tiotk in the puiyab the sikhs were leading a movement, known as the akali movement, to remove corrupt mahanis from the gurudwaras, their places of worship.
in malabar northern kerala, the moplafu, or muslim peasants, created a powerful autizamindar movement.
the viceroy wrote to the secretary of state in february 1919 that the lower classes in the towns have been seriously affected by the noncooperation movement....in certain areas the peasantry have been affected, particularly in pttfts of assam valley, united provinces, bihar and orissa, and bengal.
on 1 february 1922, mahatma gandhi announced that he would start mass civil disobedience, including nonpayment of taxes, unless within seven days the political prisoners were released and the press freed from government control.
this mood of struggle was soon transformed, into retreat.
on s february, a congress procession of 3,000 peasants at chauri chaura, a village in the gorakhpur district of u.p., was fired upon by the police.
the angry crowd attacked and burnt the police station causing the death of 22 policemen.
gandhiji took a very serious view of this incident.
it convinced him that the nationalist workers had not yet properly under stood nor learnt the practice of non violence without which, he was convinced, civil disobedience could not be a success.
apart from the fact that he would have nothing to do with violence, he also perhaps believed that the british would be able to crush easily a violent movement, for people had not yet built up enough strength a ad stamina to resist government repression.
he therefore decided to suspend ihe nationalist campaign.
the congress working committe met at bardoli in gujarat on 12 february and passed a resolution stopping alt activities which would lead to breaking of laws.
it urged congressmen to donate their time to to the constructive programmepopularisation of the charkha, national schools and froccwicn of noncoo petition volunteers parading jo calcutta courtesy nthru memorial muieum and library strijogle for swaraj 275 temperance the bardoli resolution stunned the country and had a mixed reception nmong the nationalists while some had implicit faith in gandhiji, others resented this decision to retreat.
subhash bose, one of the popular and younger leaders of the congress, has written in his autobiography, the indian struggle to sound the order of reircat just when public enthusiasm was reaching the boiling point was nothing short of a national calamity.
the principal lieutenants of ihe mahatma, deshbandhu das, pandit motllal nehru and lala l ajpat rai, who were all in prison, shared the pc, ular resentment i was with the deshbandhu at the time and i could see that he was beside himself with anger and sorrow at he way mahatma gandhi was repeatedly bungling.
many other young leaders such as jawaharlal nehru had a similar reaction.
but both the people and the leaders had faith in gandhi and did not wemt to oppose him in public.
they accepted his decision without open opposition.
the first non cooperation and civil disobedience movement virtually came to an end.
the last act of the drama was played when the government decided to take full advantage of the situation and to strike hard.
it arrested mahatma gandhi on 10 march 1922 and charged him with spreading disaffection against the government.
gandhi was sentenced to six years imprisonment after a trial which was made historic by the statement that gandhi made before the court.
pleading guilty to the prosecutions charge, he invited the court to award him the highest penalty that can be inflicted upon me for what in law is a deliberate crime, and what appears to me to be the highest duty of a citizen.
he traced at length his own political evolution from a supporter of british rule to its sharpest critic and said i came reluctantly to the conclusion that thebritish connection had made india nore tielpku than she ever was before, politically and economically.
a disarmed india has no power of resistance against any aggression ... she has become so poor that she has little power of resisting famines.
.. littk do own dwellers know how the semistarved masses of india are slowly sinking to lifelessness.
little do they know that heir miserable comfort represents ihe brokerage they get for the work they do for the foreign exploiter, that the profits and the brokerage are sucked from the masses.
little do they realise lhai the goerrment established by law in british india is carried on for the exploitation of the masses.
no sophistry, no jugglery in figures, can explain away the evidence that the skeletons in many villages present to the naked eye  in my opinion, administration of the law is thus prostituted, consciously or unconsciously, for the benefit of the exploiter.
the greater misfortune is that englishmen and their indian associates in the administration of the country do not know that they are engaged in the crime i have attempted to describe.
i am satisfied that many englishmen and indian officials honestly believe that they are administering one of the best systems devised in the world, and that india is making steady, though slow progress.
they do not know that a subtle but effective system of terrorism and an organized display of force on the one hand, and the deprivation of all powers of retaliation or self defence on the other, have emasculated the people and induced in them the habit of simulation.
in conclusion, gandhi expresssed his belief that noncooperation with evil is as much a duty as is cooperation with good.
the judge noted that he was passing on gandhi the same sentence as was passed on lokamanya tilak in 1908. very soon the khilarat.
question also lost relevance.
the people of turkey robe 276 modern india up under the leadership of mustafa kamal pasha and, in november 1922, deprived the sultan of his political power.
kamal pasha took many measures to modernise turkey and to make it a secular state.
he abolished the caliphate or the institution of the caliph and separated the state from religion by eliminating islam from the constitution.
he nationalised education, granted women extensive rights, introduced legal codes based on european models, and took steps to develop agriculture and to introduce modem industries.
all these steps broke the back of the khilalat agitation.
the khilafat agitation had made an important contribution to the non cooperation movement.
it had brought urban muslims into the nationalist movement and had been, thus, responsible in part for the feeling of nationalist enthusiasm and exhilaration fhat prevailed in the country in those days.
some historians have criticised it for having mixed politics with religion.
as a result, they say, religious consciousness spread to politics, end in the long run, the forces of communalism were strengthened.
this is true to some extent.
there was, of course, nothing wrong in the nationalist movement taking up a demand that affected muslims only.
it was inevitable that different sections of society would come to understand the need for freedom through their particular demands and experiences.
the nationalist leadership, however, failed to some extent in raising the religious political consciousness of the muslims to the higher plane of secular political consciounsness.
at the same time it should also be kept in view that the khilafat agitation represented much wider feelings of the muslims than their concern for the caliph.
it was in reality an aspect of the general spread of antiimperialist feelings among the muslims.
these feelings found concrete expression on the struggle for swaraj 277 khilafat question.
after all there was no protest in india when kamal pasha abolished the caliphate in 1924. it may be noted at this stage that even though the noncooperation and civil disobedience movement had ended in failure, national movement had been strengthened in more than one way.
nationalist sentiments and the national movement had now reached the remotest corners of the land.
the educated indians had learnt to rely on their own people.
the indian people had lost their sense of fearthe brute strength of british power in india no longer frightened them.
they had gained tremendous selfconfidence and selfesteem, which no defeats and retreats could shake.
this was expressed by gandhijt when he declaied that the fight that was commenced in 1920 is a fight to the finish, whether it lasts one month or one year or many months or many years.
the swarajists disintegration and disorganisation set in after the withdrawal of the civil disobedience movement.
enthusiasm evaporated and disillusionment and discouragement prevailed in the ranks of the congress party.
moreover, serious difference arose among the leaders.
a fresh lead was now given by c.r.
das and martial nehru who advocated a new line of political activity under the changed conditions.
they said that nationalists should end the boycott of the legislative councils, enter them, obstruct their working according to official plans, expose their weaknesses, and thus use them to arouse public enthusiasm.
sardar vallabhbhai patel, dr. ansari, babu rajcndra prasad, and others, known as no changers, opposed council entry.
they warned that legislative politics would weaken nationalist fervour and create rivalries among the leaders.
they therefore continued to emphasise the constructive programme of spinning, tempcrance, hmdumuslim unity, and v, r         i t    .. v j  1    gandhiji with the ali brothers t the beigaum session of the congress,1924 courtesy photo division, ministry of information and broadcasting, govt, of india 278 modern india removal of untouchability.
in december 1922, das and motilal nehru formed the congress khilafat swaraj party with das as president and motlilal nehru as one of the secretaries.
the new party was to function as a group within the congress.
it accepted the congress programme except in one respect it would take part in council elections.
the swarajists and the nochangers now engaged in fierce political controversy.
even ga.idhiji, who had been released on 5 february 1924 on grounds of health, failed in his efforts to unite them.
but on his advice the two groups agreed to remain in the congress though they would work in their separate ways.
even though the swarajists had had little time for preparations they did very well in the election of november 1923. theywon 42 seats out of the 101 elected seats in the central legislative assembly.
with the cooperation of other indian groups they repeatedly outvoted the government in the central assembly and in several of the provincial councils.
in march 1925, they succeeded in electing vithalbhai j. patel, a leading nationalist leader, as the president speaker of the central legislative assembly, but they failed to change the policies of the authoritarian government of tndia and found it necessary to walk out of the central assembly in march 1926. what was worse, their work failed to bring the masses or the middle classes into active politics.
at the same time the no changers were also not succcssful in this respect.
in fact, both groups failed to check ihe spreading political rot, but as there was no basic difference between the two wings and because they kept on the best of terms and recognised each others antiimperialist character, they could readily unite later when the time was ripe for a new national struggle.
meanwhile the nationalist movement and the swarajists suffered another grievous blow in the death of dehbandhu das in june 925. as the noncooperation movement petered out and the people felt frustrated, communalism reared its ugly head.
the communal elements took advantage of the situation to propagate their views and after 1923 the country was repeatedly plunged into communal riots.
the muslim league and the hindu mahasabha, which was founded in december 1917, once again became active.
the result was that the growing feeling that all people were indians first received a setback.
even the swarajist party, whose main leaders, motilal nehru and das, were staunch nationalists, was split by communalism, a group known as responsivkts, including madan mohan maiviya, lala lajpat rai, and n.c, keikar, offered cooperation to the government so that the socalled hindu interests might be safeguarded.
they accused motilai nehru of letting down hindus, of being antihindu, of favouring cowslaughter, and of eating beef.
the muslim communalists were no less active in fighting for the loaves and fishes or office.
gndhiji, who had repeatedly asserted that hindumuslim unity must be our creed for all time and under ail circumstances tried to intervene and improve the situation.
in september 1924, he went on a 21 days fast at delhi in maulana mohammed alis house to do penance for the inhumanity revealed in the struggle for swaraj 279 communal riots.
but his efforts were of little avail.
the situation in the country appeared to be dark indeed.
there was general political apathy gandhi was living in retirement, the swarajists were split, communalism was flourishing.
gandhi wrote in may 1927 my only hope lies in prayer and answer to prayer.
but, behind the scenes, forces of national upsurge had been growing.
when in november 1927 the announcement of the formation of the simon commission came, india again emerged out of darkness and entered a new era of political struggle.
the second noncooperation movement the year 1927 witnessed many portents of national recovery and evidence began to gather that the people were waiting for a lead.
politically this force and energy found reflection in the rise of a new leftwing in the congress under the leadership of jawaharlal nehru and subhash chandra bose.
the two soon toured the country preaching the new ideology of socialism.
they attacked imperialism, capitalism, and landlordism, and told the people that if freedom had to be won by the people, it would not come as a gift from the british parliament.
they soon came to be idolised by the students and other young people.
indian youth were becoming active.
all over the country youth leagues were being formed anf student conferences held.
the first all bengal conference of students was held in august 1928 and was presided over by jawaharlal nehru.
after this many other student associations were started in the country.
the first all india youth congress met in december.
moreover, the young indian nationalists began gradually to turn to socialism and to advocate radical solutions for the political.
social ills from which the country was suffering.
they also put forward and popularzej the.
programme of complete independence.
280 modern inbta socialist and communist groups came into existence in the 1920s.
th example of the russian revolution had aroused interest among many young nationalists.
many of them were dissatisfied with gandhi hi political ideas and programmes and turned to socialist ideology for guidance.
m.n.
roy became the first indian to be elected to the leadership of the communist international.
in 1924, the government arrested muzaffar ahmed and s.a. dange, accused them of spreading communist ideas, and tried them along vrith others in the kanpur conspiracy case.
in 1925, the communist party came into existence.
moreover, many workers and peasants parties were founded in different parts pf the country, these parties and groups propagated marxist and communist ideas.
the peasants and workers were also once again stirring.
in uttar pradesh, there was large scale agitation among tenants for the revision of tenancy laws.
the jawaharhi nehru and subhas chandra bose arriving to attend a congress meeting courtesy nehru memorial museum and library, new delhi struggle for swaraj 281 tenants wanted lower rents, protection from eviction, and relief from indebtedness.
in gujarat, the peasants protested against official efforts to increase land revenue.
the famous bardoli satyagralia occured at this time.
in 1928, under the leadership of sardar yallabhbhai patel the peasants organised a no tax campaign and in the end won their demand.
there was a rapid growth of trade unionism under the leadership of the all india trade union congress.
many strikes occurred during 1928. there was a long strike lasting for two months, in the railway workshop at kharagpur.
the south indian railway workers went oil strike.
another strike was organised in the tata iron and steel works at jamshedpur.
subhash chandra bose played an important role in the settlement of this strike.
the most important strike of the period was in bombay textile mills.
nearly 150,000 workers went on strike for over five months.
this strike was led by the communists.
over five lakh workers took part in strikes during 1928. another reflection of the new mood was the growing activity of the revolutionary terrorist movement which too was beginning to take a socialist turn.
the failure of the first noncooperation movement had led to the revival of the terrorist movement.
after an all india conference the hindustan republican association was founded in october 1924 to organise an armed revolution.
the government struck at it by arresting a large number of terrorist youth and trying them in the kakori conspiracy case 1925. seventeen were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment, four were transported for life, and four, including ram prasad bismil and ashfaqulla, were hanged.
the terrorists soon came under the influence of socialist ideau, and, in 1928, under the leadership of chandra shekhar azad changed the title of their organisation to the hindustan socialist republican association.
a dramatic manifestation of revol utionary terrorist activity was the assa ssination of a british police officer by bhagat singh, azad and rajguru, who had earlier ordered lathi charge on a demonstration led by lala lajpat rai.
this had resulted in a fatal injury to the great punjabi leader, known popularly as shere punjab.
the assassination was justified by the revolutionary young men as follows the murder of a leader respected by millions of people at the unworthy bands of an ordinary police official... .was an insult to tbe nation.
it was ibe bounden duty of young men of india to efface it... .we regret to have had to kill a person but he was part and parcel of that inhuman and unjust order which has to be destroyed.
in him, an agent of british rule has been done away with, shedding of human blood grieves us but bloodshed at the altar of revolution is unavoidable.
our objective is to work for a revolution which would end exploitation of man by man.
282 modern india bhgat singh courtesy nehru memorial museum and library similarly, bhagat singh and b.k.
dutt threw a bomb in the central legislative assembly on 8 april 1929. they wanted to protest against the passage of the public safety bill, which would haye reduced civil liberties.
the bomb did not harm anyone for it had been deliberately made harmless.
the aim was not to kill bu, as a terrorist leaflet put it, to make the deaf hear.
bhagat singh and b. k. dutt could have easily escaped after throwing the bomb but they deliberately chose to be arrested for they wanted to make use of the court as a forum for revolutionary propaganda.
ip bengal too revolutionary terrorist activities were revived.
in april 1930, a raid was organised on the govermrent armoury at chittagong under the leadership of surya sen. this was the first of many attacks on unpopular government officials.
a remarkable aspect of the terrorist movement in bengal was the participation of young women.
the government struck hard at the revolutionary terrorists.
many of them were arrested and tried in a series of famous cases, bhagat singh and a few others were also tried for the assassination of police officers.
the statements of the young revolutionaries in the courts and their fearless and defiant attitude won the sympathy of the people.
particularly inspiring was the hunger strike they undertook as a protest against the horrible conditions in the prisons.
as political prisoners they demanded an honourable and decent treatment.
during the course of this hungerstrike, jatin das, a frail young man, achieved martyrdom after a 63 days epic fast.
bhagat singh, sukhdev and rajguru were executed on 23 march 1931, despite popular protest.
in a letter to the jail superintendent written a few days before their execution the three affirmed very soon, the final battle will begin.
its outcome will be decisive.
we took part in the struggle and we are proud of having done so.
in two of his last letters, bhagat singh also affirmed the revolutionary teirorist faith in socialism.
he wrote the peasants have to liberate struggle for swaraj 283 themselves not only from foreign yoke but also from the yoke of landlords and capitalists.
in his last message of 3 march 1931 he declared that the struggle in india would continue so long as a handful of exploiters go on exploiting the labour of the common people for their own ends.
it matters little whether these exploiters are purely british capitalists, or british and indians in alliance, or even purely indian.
the heartless attitude of the government in refusing to change their sentence to life imprisonment further hardened the peoples anger, while the deep patriotism, invincible courage and determination, and sense of sacrifice displayed by the young revolutionaries stirred the indian people.
the revolutionary terrorist movement, which played an important role in spreading nationalist and socialist consciousness, soon abated though stray activities were carried on for several years more.
chandra shekhar azad was killed in a shooting encounter wuh the police in a public park, later renamed azad park, at allahabad in february 1931. surya sen was arrested in february 1933 and hanged soon after.
hundreds of other revolutionaries were arrested and sentenced to varying terms of imprisonments.
thus a new political situation was beginning to arise by the end of the twenties.
writing of these years, lord irwin, the viceroy, recalled later that some new force was working of which even those, whose knowledge of india went back for 20 or 30 years, had not yet learnt the full significance.
the government was determined to suppress this new trend.
as we have seen, the terrorists were suppressedwith ferocity.
the growing trade union movement and communist movement were dealt with in the same manner.
in march 1929, thirtyone prominent trace union and communist leaders including three englishmen were arrested and, after a trial meerut conspiracy case lasting four years, sentenced to long periods of imprisonment.
boycott of the simon commission in november 1927, the british government appointed the indian statutory commission, known popularly after the name of its chairman as the simon commission, to go into the question of further constitutional reform.
all the members of the commission were englishmen.
this announcement was greeted by a chorus of protest from all indians.
what angered them most was the exclusion of indians from the commission and the basic notion behind this exclusion that foreigners would discuss and decide upon indias fitness for self government.
in othef words, the british action was seen as a violation of the principle of selfdetermination and a deliberate insult to the selfrespect of the indians.
at its madras session in 1927, presided over by dr. ansari, the national congress decided to boycott the commission at every stage and in every form, the muslim league and the hindu muhasabha decided to support the congress decision.
in fact, the simon commission united, at least temporarily, different groups and parties in the country.
as a gesture of solidarity with the nationalists, the muslim league even accepted the 284 modern india principle of joint electorates, provided seats were reserved for the muslims.
all important indian leaders and parties decided to meet the british rhallenge by drawing up an agreed constitution for india.
an all parties conference was convened for the purpose first at delhi and then at poona.
the conference appointed a subcommittee headed by motilal nehru and included among its members ali imam, tej bahadur sapru, and subhash bose.
the subcommittee submitted its report known as the nehru report in august 1928. the report recommended that the attainment of dominion status should be considered the next immediate step, india should be a federation built on the basis of linguistic provinces and provincial autonomy, the executive should be fully responsible to the legislature, elections should be by joint electorates on he basis of adult suffrage, and that seats in the legislatures should be reserved for religious minorities for a period of 10 years.
unfortunately, the all parly convention, held at calcutta in december 1928, failed to pass the nehru report.
objections were raised by some of the communalminded leaders belonging to the muslim league, the hmdu mahasabha and the sikh league.
the muslim league was itself split on the issue along nationalist and communal lines.
mohammed ah jinnah put forth lin fourteen point demands at this time, claiming, among other things, separate electorates, one third of the seats in the central legislature for the muslims, reservation of seats for the muslims in bengal and the punjab in proportion to population, and the vesting of residual powers in the provinces.
the hindu maliasabha denounced the report as promuslim.
thus the prospects of national unity were foiled by communal groups.
so far as merely constitutional questions were concerned the gulf between the nationalists and the comnvunalists was not really large at this time.
the nationalists had willingly provided the necessary safeguards to protect the interests of the minorities.
religion, culture, language and the.
fundainental rights of individuals as well as the minorities were all to be protected.
unfortunately, these leaders failed to fully understand the psychology of the minorities at the time.
the minorities, particularly the muslims, felt what was perhaps an unreasonable fear of the majority.
only by practical expcricnce of modem politics would they gradually lose this fear and then refuse to be exploited by reactionary leaders or the alien governmci tmy lmlnmt.ilils ic.meis i can sod ikii hiiiv writ inlci, jawaharh  u. fin example, wrote in hi3 that o  .iic exlent itns for is justified, or is at least unilcrilanjtdilc in a nuiiaut omimwitv .. a special responsibility does oltnli to tic dirnli.ii in f .h,i k n struggle for swaraj 285 hecuuse they are the majority community and because economically and educationally they are moie advanced.
the hindu maliasabha, instead of discharging that responsibility, lias acted in a manner winch has undoubtedly increased llie co minimal ism of ihe muslims and made them distmsl the hindus all the more.
..one communal is m does not end the otbci each feeds on the olhei and both fallen in another article written in 1934, he advised we should therefore remove this fear complex and make the muslim masses realise that they can have any protection that they ieally desire.
even jinnah accepted this at the time.
in a speech in 1931 he said my position is that i would rather have a settlement even on the footing of separate electorates, hoping and trusting hat when w work out new constitution and when both hindus and muslims get rid of distrust, suspicion and fears, and when they get heir freedom, we would rise to the occasion and probably separate clcctorate will go sooner than most of us think.
but most of the nationalist leaders would either not accept this view or m any case failed to act upon it at the time.
on the one hand they were pressurized by the hindu communalists, on the other they felt that since the fears of the minority were illusory and the communal leaders had no mass support, their demands could be safely rejected.
this was a mistake.
the result was that even a nationalist like maulana muhammad ali complained that the nationalist headers were willing to compromise with the british government on the question of complete freedom but refused to conciliate their own communalists.
maulana azad commented at that time1 the muslims were fools to ask for safeguards, and the hindus were greater fools to refuse them  tn aiy case, muslim commu nalism began to grow steadily after this.
it should also be noted that there existed a basic difference between the politics of the nationalists and the politics of the communalists.
the nationalists carried on a political struggle against the alien government to win political rights and freedom for the country.
this was not the case with the communalists, hindu or muslim.
their demands were made on the nationalists on the other hand, they usually looked to the foreign government for support and favours.
they frequently struggled against the congress and cooperated with the government.
far more important than the proceedings of the all parties conference was the popular upsurge against the simon commission.
the commissions arrival in india led to a powerful protest movement in which nationalist enthusiasm and unity reached new heights.
on 3 february, the day the commission reached bombay, an all india hartal was organised.
wherever the commission went it was greeted with hartals and blackflag demonstrations under the slogan simon go back.
the government used brutal suppression and police huacks to break the popular opposition.
the antisimon commission movement did not immediately lead to a wider political struggle because gandhi, the unquestioned though undeclared leader of the national movement, was not yet convinced that the time for struggle had come.
but popular enthusiasm could not be held back for long for the country 286 modern india was once again in a mood of struggle.
poo mi swaraja the national congress soon reflected this new mood.
gandhi came back to active politics and attended the calcutta session of the congress in december 1928. he now began to consolidate the nationalist ranks.
the first step was to reconcile the militant leftwing of the congress.
jawaharlal nehru was now made the president of the congress at the historic lahore session of 1929. this event had its romantic side too.
son had succeeded father motilal nehru was the president of the congress in 1928 as the official head of the national movement, marking a unique family triumph in the annals of modern, history.
the lahore session of the congress gave voice to the new, militant spirit.
it passed a resolution declaring poorna swaraj full independence to be the congress objective.
on 31 december 1929 wa hoisted the after the resolution demanding complete independence was passed by the congress, the indian people observed 26 january at the independence day every year.
the illustration shows mounted police charging people who had gathered to observe the independence day1 in calcutta, 1931. couritsy gandhi smark sangrahalya samitt, new delhi text of the pledge of independence as taken by he people of india on puina swaraj day, 26 january 1930 lebge of 3ntrpenbcnte a tfcfcltt it thi ptoru 01 tnw on puina svmkjij day, january 24, lt wnr  rf fi ar nfwwwr rjv 0 ir jwjm ii of n oftir to aiw wo  j0 rmfi 0 irir tod omd n iiv tfrrttmn of fcr.
i fw irj my bur fott opportunity  fro.
c miw jw ikw r tt toitrmmffit jepwtvet s propu of tbre nai ond iin mth, 4r m1 1 fneiirr njibi tq diet it m to wbdhb it.
tar 0rrfiia coiwaaftf 4 wm 4u wof nf jrprij ti fprww arir freedom but bm busj larlf om ibt xptottmr of the miiki, sttd hot ttr4 fjn rcomtmicdly, pdittrdfy, rjfmmlf omj iptrttmdfy vr mric there far thmt lujtm  arirr if britnb ika omj ofton rrm skwf w atmpttff isjrrwrwy, gi flrr mtned nmiwrrn, 6r vict ra oar people t m  wf ptoporftott ftt out ettrowk.
oor tktrit in come n xvt ptt fr doy, smi of the hwy torn nv poy 20 mtr ranej fro tbe w rrivniw dr rued from ihe peowniry ond  from ibe idt tor, width ftut moi broihy  the pom vfudne mtinn, rb 01 .bomd ipinxthfr bnr been detimyed, ht peotontry ajte for j trod mr momtbt tit tbr inr, d jhh tbetr jmtehtrt for  m 0 bondu tmfif gmjutfirtmk bo1 atr jr  narf rwiulrm, r r trsffi ihnt detiroyed cntiomi 4d mrrewy jmit been u mompntafed u iu hraft fmrihrr bnrdent om tht mmmry brttab mattttftwin ted gooit rouihiuie tbr bulk of ome loiporti cdiiomi inltfx bftroy titof p4rttdity for brtiub mmuforlnrti, and ftvtme fitm tbrm a mf,t mf it irwm tbe brjm on the mmwt but for miwhwk 4 bmtdy 4tkojiutmjittattoh siht ftrr 0tbtirry bt bfru ftr if ai 9tt wjjh b rtwufd im mttfntm jrtturd wtf vow the trtttniry tvttfu ttly, iwjtrff i0fm bn unrr fxrn h trjurtl gt vtijer it bninb rtxmt no reform mh1 puttth d jnmr to ibt pntpir.
tbv nf 1 b tf bfmi brfvrr fnw tburtty thr ttlli rtf fret txpmuau nf npuinrt w fwtt wito toton bit tvh jfntfj to nj mitts ttf vr ttnnirymem are 0 in tn eidt 4 rftmrtt io tfktr btnr alf sjtttmnirithr taent n kilttd thr maivi 6ir to be nitifirj tutib hji unt n0itei tad ifaktbipt, cthtly fbf lyitrm of tjimtnh bet toro mt from nut ionrw mnt om trmoutu hit mojr t bog the trv rbtiut tbi fund .
siritmitty,  iiimrmnmrhf  rnajr m mmtusttty tnj thr pretense of art titttr ormy of orfxfutm emtoyej mffo jtojty rficti to nnib lit mi ihe ipirtt of tiklatt bt mlf tn tbiitk tbot wr t itjob.
sfirr onrteiin or pm up 4 de fetter ojtoihtl forex ojmretsiot.
ot n t jrfruj unr bom ft atj foiiti from be otfmkt of tbkir, robbers and murmni vt bcid it to be j crime mw gait io tubmit guy fouler ta 4 roll itfoi  coottj ibn foutftdd dhdiifr to rtr ratmlry.
wr reraittne, bouewe, ifut tbr mtni rfniin k tf freejum if uni through tie, w mui tbrttfnrr prrpmrc mtrtrtie 61 ititbdrhin to for 4t ue cam, alf toimniory 4ilo itoitvm row ihe lirttnb ghrrhmftti, ohj m 41 prrpotr for atd jnofadirftrr, mdmd tmg rtmpfymrnt uf tityn wr orr tohtwitft tbti if ue csa btti withdraw our wittuidry brtp od slop pyhcht of uet u it hunt jotm t turner, rven njer prov toibtt, fit  ibn ntbumnt rttfe n stutrtj vr therefore berebx lolrmitiy rt joit tt firry tmf tbr cifugrrn smtr,fmtn muni from iitue to time for ibe pnepott of tsimnbthji purno su ere.
288 modern india newly adopted tricolour flag of freedom.
26 january 1930 was fixed as tlie first independence day, which was to be so celebrated every year with the people taking the pledge that it was a crime against man and god to submit any longer to british rule.
the congress session also announced the launching of a civil disobedience movement.
but it did not draw up a programme of struggle.
that was left to mahatma gandhi, the congress organisation being placed at his disposal.
oncc again the nationalist movement led by gandhi faced the govern ment.
the country was again filled with hope and exhilaration and the determination to be free.
the second civil disobedience movement the second civil disobedience movement was started by gandhi on 12 march 1930 with his famous dandi march.
together with 78 chosen followers, gandhi walked nearly 200 miles from sabarmati ashram to dandi, a village on the gujarat seacoast.
here gandhi and his followers made salt in violation of the salt laws.
this act was a symbol of the indian peoples refusal to live under britishmade laws and therefore under british rule.
gandhi declared the british rule in india has brought about moral, material, cultural, and spiritual ruination of this great country, i regard this rule as a curse.
i am out to destroy this system or government  sedition has become my religion.
ours is a nonviolent battle.
we are not to kill anybody but it is our dharma to sec that the curse of this government is blotted out.
the movement now spread rapidly.
everywhere in the country people joined hartals, demonstrations, and the campaign to boycott foreign goods and to refuse to pay taxes.
lakhs of indians offered passive resistance.
in many parts of the country, the peasants withheld payment of land revenue and rent, a notable feature of the movement was the wide participation of women.
thousands of them left the seclusion of their homes and offered satyagraha.
they took active part in picketing shops selling foreign cloth or liquor.
they marched shoulder to shoulder with the men in processions.
the movement reached the extreme northwestern corner of india and stirred the brave and hardy pathans.
under the leadership of khan abdul ghaffar khan, popularly known as the frontier gandhi, the pathans organised the society of khudai khidmatgars or servants ot god, known popularly as red shirts, they were pledged to nonviolence and the freedom struggle.
another noteworthy incident occurred in peshawar at this time.
two platoons of garhwali soldiers refused to open fire on mass demonstrators even though it meant facing court martial and long terms of imprisonment.
this episode showed that nationalism was beginning to penetrate the indian army, the chief instrument of struggle for swaraj 289 british rule.
similarly, the movement found an echo in the easternmost corner of india.
the manipuris took a brave part in it and nagaland produced a brave heroine in ram gaidinliu who ut the age of 13 responded to the call of gandbi and the congress and raised the banner of rebellion against foreign rule.
the young rani was captured in 1932 and sentenced to life imprisonment.
she wasted her bright youthful years in the dark cclls of various assam jails, to be released only in 1947 by the government of free india, jawaharlal nehru was to write of her in 1937  a day will come when india also will remember her and cherish her the governments reply to the national struggle was the same as before an effort to crush it through ruthless repression, lathi charges and firing on unarmed crowds of men and women.
over 90,000 satyagrah s, including gandhi and other congress leaders, were imprisoned.
the congress was declared illegal.
the nationalist press was gagged through strict censorship of news.
according to official figures over 110 persons were killed and over 300 wounded in police firings.
unofficial estimates place the number of dead far higher.
moreover, thousands of persons had their heads and bones broken in lathi charges.
south india in particular experienced repression in its most severe form.
the police often beat up men just for wearing khadi or gandhi cap.
n the end people resistedat eliora in andhra, leading to a firing by the police in which several people lost their lives.
meanwhile, he british government summoned in london in 1930 the first round table conference of indian leaders and spokesmen of the british government to discuss the simon commission report.
but the national congress boycotted the conference and its proceedings proved abortive.
for a conference on indian affairs without the congress was like staging ramlila without rama.
the government now made attempts to negotiate an agreement with the congress so that it would attend the round table conference.
finally, lord irwin and gandhi negotiated a settlement in march 1931. the government agreed to release those political prisoners who had remained nonviolent, while the congress suspended the civil disobedience movement and agreed to take part in the second round table conference.
many of the congress leaders, particularly, the younger, leftwing section, were opposed to the gandhiirwin pact for the government had not accepted even one of the major nationalist demands.
it bqd not agreed even to the demand that the death sentence on bhagat singh and his two comrades be commuted to life imprisonment.
but gandhi was convinced that lord irwin and the british were sincere in their desire to negotiate on indian demartds.
his concept of satyagraha included the need to give the opponent every chance to show a change of heart.
he prevailed upon the karachi session of the congress to approve the agreement.
the karachi session is also memorable for a resolution on fundamental rights and the national economic programme.
the resolution guaranteed basic civil and political rights to the people.
it provided for the nationalization of key industries 290 modern india and transport, better conditions for the workers, agrarian reform, and free and compulsory primary education, it also assured that the culture, language and script of the minorities and of the different linguistic areas shall be protected.
gandhi went to england in september 1931 to attend the second rojind table conference.
but in spite of his powerful advocacy, the british government refused to concede the basic nationalist demand for freedom on the basis of the immediate grant of dominion status.
on his return, the congress resumed the civil disobedience movement.
the government now headed by the new viceroy lord willington was tins time fully determined and prepared to crush the congress.
in fact, the bureaucracy in india had never relented.
just after the signing of the gandhi invin pact, a crowd had been fired upon in east godavari, in andnra, and foar persons were killed simply because the people had put up gandhis portrait.
aft.r the failure of the round table confejence, gandhi and other leaden of the congress were again arrested and the congress declared illegal.
the normal working of laws was suspended and the administration carried on through special ordinances.
the police indulged in naked terror and committed innu merable atrocities on the freedom fighters.
over a lakh of satyagrahis were arrested the lands, houses, and other property of thousands was confiscated.
nationalist literature was banned while the nationalist newspapers were again placed under censorship.
government repression succeeded ia the end, helped as it was by the differences among indian leaders on communal and other questions.
the civil disobedience movement gradually waned and political enthusiasm and exhilaration gave way to frustration and depression.
the congress officially suspended the movement in may 1933 and withdrew it in.
may 1934. gandhi once again withdrew from active politics.
congress membership dropped to less than five lakhs.
nationalist poiitics, 19351939 the government of india act, 1935 while the congress was in the thick of battle, the third round table co iference met in london in november 1932, once again without the leaders of the congress.
its discussions eventually led to the passing of the government of india act of 1935. the act provided for the establishment of an all india federation and a new system of government for the provinces on the basis of provincial autonomy.
the federation was to be based on a union, of the provinoes of british india and the princely states.
there was to be a bicameral federal legislature in which the states were given disproportionate weightage.
moreover, the representatives of the states were not to be elccted by the people, but appointed directly by the rulers.
only 14 per cent of the total population in british india was given the right to vote.
even this legislature, in which the princes were once again to be used to check and counter the nationalist elements, was denied any real power.
defence and foreign affairs remained outside its control, while the governor struggle for swaraj 291 general retained special control over the other subjects.
the governorgeneral and the governors were to be appointed by the british government and were to be responsible to it.
in the provinces, local power was increased.
ministers responsible to the provincial assemblies were to control all departments of provincial administration.
but the governors were given special powers.
they could veto legislative action and legislate on their own.
moreover, they retained full control over the civil service and the police.
the act could not satisfy the nationalist aspiration for both political and economic power continued to be concentrated in the hands of the british government, foreign rule was to continue as before, only a few popularly elected ministers were to be added to the structure of british administration in india.
the congress condemned the act as totally disappointing, the feiral part of the act was never introducm but the provincial part was soon put into operation.
bitterly opposed to the act though the congress was., it decided to contest the elections under the new act of 1935, though with the declared aim of showing how unpopular the act was.
the elections conclusively demonstrated that a large majority of indian people supported the congress which swept the polls in most of the provinces.
congress ministries were formed in july 1937 in seven out of eleven provinces.
later, congress formed coalition governments in two others.
only bengal and the punjab had non congress ministries.
the congress ministries the congress ministries, could obviously not change the basically imperialist character of british administration in india and thy failed to introduce a radical era.
but they did try to improve the condition of the people within the narrow limits of the powers given to them under the act of 1935. the congress ministers reduced their own salaries drastically to rs.
500 per month.
most of then travelled second or third class on the railways.
they set up new standards of honesty andf public service.
they paid1 greater attention to primary, technical, and higher education1 and public health.
they helped the peasant by1 passing antiusury and tenanoy legislation.
they promoted civil liberties.
political prisoners were released1 theee was relaseionf police and secret service raj.
freedom ot the press was enhanced.
trade unions felt freer and were able to win wage increases for workers.
the laigest gain was psychological.
people felt as if they were breathing the air of victory and self government, for was it not a great achievement that men who were in prison till the other day were now ruling in the secretariat the period between 1935 and 1939 witnessed several other important political developments which, in a way, marked a new turn in the nationalist movement and the congress.
growth of socialist ideas the 1930s witnessed the rapid growth of socialist ideas within and outside the congress.
in 1929 there was a great economic slump or depression in the 292 modern india united states which gradually spread to the rest of the world.
everywhere in the capitalist countries there was a steep decline in production and foreign trade, resulting in economic distress and large scale unemployment.
at one time, the number of unemployed was 3 million in britain, 6 million in germany, and 12 million in the united states.
on the other hand, the economic situation in the soviet union was just the opposite.
not only was there no slump, but the years between 1929 and 1936 witnessed the successful completion of the first two five year plans which pushed the soviet industrial production by more than four times.
the world depression, thus, brought the capitalist system into  disrepute and drew attention towards marxism, socialism, and economic planning.
consequently, socialist ideas began to attract more and more people, especially the young, the workers, and the peasants.
the economic depression also worsened the conditions of the peasants and workers in india.
the prices of agricultural products dropped by over 50 per cent by the end of 1932. the employers tried to reduce wages.
the peasants all over the country began to demand land reforms, abolition of zamindari, reduction of land revenue and rent, and relief from indebtedness.
workers in the factories and plantations increasingly demanded better conditions of work and recognition of their trade union rights.
consequently, there was rapid growth of trade unions in the cities and the kisan sabhas peasants unions in many areas, particularly, in uttar pradesh, bihar, tamil nadu, andhra pradesh, kerala, and the puqjab.
the first allindia peasant organisation, the allindia kisan sabha was formed in 1936. the peasants also began to take a more active part in the national movement.
within the congress the leftwing tendency found reflection in the election of jawaharlal nehru as president for 1936 and 1937 and of subhash chandra bose for 1938 and 1939. in his presidential address to the lucknow congress in 1936, neiru urged the congress to accept socialism as us goal and to bring itself closer to the peasantry and the working class.
this was also, he felt, the best way of weaning away the muslim masses from the influence of their reactionary communal leaders.
he said i am convinced that the only key to the solution of the worlds problems and of indias problems lim in socialism, and, when i use this word, i do so not in a. vague humanitarian way but in the scientific, economic sense  that involves vast and revolutionary changes in our political and social structure, the ending of vested interests in land and industry, as well as the feudal and autocratic indian states system.
that means the ending of private property, except in a restricted sense, and the replacement of the present profit system by a higher ideal of cooperative service.
it means ultimately a change in our instincts and habits and desires.
in short, it means a new civilization, radically different from the present capitalist order.
outside the congress, the socialist tendency led to the growth of the communist party under the leadership of p.c.
joshi and the foundation of the congress socialist party under the leadership of acharya narendra dev and jai prakash narayan.
in 1938, subhash chandra bose had been reelected president struggle for swaraj 293 of the congress even though gandhi had opposed him.
but opposition of gandhi and his supporters in the congress working committee compelled bose to resign from the presidentship of the congress in 1939. he and many of his leftwing followers now founded the forward bloc.
congress and world affairs a second major development of the period 19351939 was the increasing interest the congress took in world affairs.
the congress had from its inception in 1885 opposed the use of the indian army and of indias resources to serve british interests in africa and asia.
it had gradually developed a foreign policy based on opposition to thesprcad of imperialism.
in february 1927, jawaharlal nehru on behalf of the national congress attended the congress of oppressed nationalities at brussels organised by political exiles and revolutionaries from the countries of asia, africa, and latin america, suffering from economic or political imperialism.
the congress was called to coordinate and plan their common struggle against imperialism.
many leftwing intellectuals and political leaders of europe also joined the congress.
in hr d dress to the congress, nehru said we realise that there is much in common in the struggle which various subject and semisubject and oppressed peoples are carrying on today.
tbeit opponents are often the same, although they sometimes appear in different guises and the means employed for their subjection are often similar, nehru was elected to the executive council of the league against imperialism that was born at this congress.
in 1927, the madras session of the national congress warned the government that the people of jawaharlal nehru and v.k.
krishna menon with general lister at general listers headquarters in spain.
courtesy nehru memorial museum and library 294 modern india india would not support britain in any war undertaken to further its imperialist aims.
in the 1930s the congress took a firm stand against imperialism in any part of the world and supported national movements in asia and africa.
it condemned fascism which was rising at the time in italy, germany, and japan as the most extreme form of imperialism and racialism and gave full support to the people of ethiopia, spain, czechoslavakia, and china in their fight against aggression by the fascist powers.
iq 1937, when japan launched an attack on china, the national congress passed a resolution calling upon the indian people to refrain from the use of japanese goods as a mark of their sympathy with the people of china.
and in 1938, it sent a medical mission, headed by dr. m. atal, to work with the chinese armed forces.
the national congress fully recognised that the future of india was closely interlinked with the coming struggle between fascism and the forces of freedom, socialism and democracy.
the emerging congress approach to world problems, tbe awareness of indias position in the world, were dearly enunciated in jawaharlal nehrus presidential address to the lucknow congress in 1936 our struggle was but part of a far wider struggle for freedom, and the forces that moved us were moving millions of people all over the world and driving them into action.
capitalism, in ita difficulties, took to fascism.
.it became, even in some of its homelands, what its imperialist counterpart hed long been in the subject colonial countries.
fascism and imperialism thus stood out as the two faces of the now decaying capitalism.. .socialism in the west and the rising nationalism of the eastern and other dependent countries opposed this combination of fascism, and imperialism.
while stressing the congress opposition to any participation of indian government in a war between imperialist powers, lie offered full cooperation to the progressive forces of the world, to those who stood for freedom add the breaking of political and soda bonds, for in their struggle against imperialism and fascist reaction, we realise that our struggle is a common one.
states peoples straggle the third major development during this period was the spread of national movement to the princely states.
appalling economic, political, and social conditions prevailed in most of them.
peasants were oppressed, land revenue and taxation were excessive and unbearable, education was retarded, health and other social services were extremely backward, and freedom of the press and other civil rights hardly existed.
the bulk of the state revenues were spent on the luxuries of the princes.
in several states serfdom, slavery, and forced labour flourished.
throughout history, a corrupt and decadent lulei was checked to some extent by the challenge of internal revolt or external aggression.
british rule freed the princes of both these dangers, and they felt free to indulge in gross misgovernment.
moreover, the british authorities began to use the princes to prevent the growth of national unity and to counter the rising national movement.
the princes in turn depended for their selfpreservation from popular revolt on the struggle for swaraj 295 protection by the british power and adopted a hostile attitude to the national movement.
in 1921, the chamber of prince was created to enable the princes to meet and discuss under british guidance mailers of common interest.
in the government of india act of 1935, the proposed federal structure was so planned as to check the forces of nationalism.
it was provided that the princes would get 25th of the seats in the upper house and l3rd of the seats in the lower hwse, people of many of the princely states now began to organise movements for democratic rights and popular governments.
allindia states peoples conference had already been founded in december 1927 to coordinate political activities in the different states.
the second noncooptation movement produced a deep impact on the ftiihds of the peddle of these states and stirted them into political activity.
popular struggles were waged in many of the states, particularly ih rajkot, jaipur, kashmir, hyderabad, and travancore the priflflfcs ftief these struggle,  with violent repression.
some of them also took bourse116 edffifhufialiarii.
the nixam of hyderabad declared that the popular agitation was anti muslim tbe maharaja of kashmir branded it as antihindu while the maharaja of travancore claimed that christians were behind the popular agitation.
the national congress supported the states peoples struggle and urged the princes to introduce democratic representative government and to grant fundamental civil rights.
in 1938, when the congress defined its goal of independence it included the independence of the princely states.
next year, at the tripuri session, it decided to take a more active part in the states peoples movements, as if to emphasise the common national aims of the political struggles in india and in the states, jawaharlal nehru became the president of the all india states peoples conference in 1939. the states peoples movement awakened national consciousness among the people of the states.
it also spread a new consciousness of unity all over india.
growth of communallsm the fourth important development was the growth of communaiism.
once again the elections for the legislative assemblies, organised on the basis of restricted franchise and separate electorates, had produced separatist sentiments.
moreover, the congress failed to win many seats reserved for the minoritiesit won 26 out of 482 sats reserved for muslims and even out of these 26 seats 15 were won in the north western frontier provincesthough the muslim league too did not capture many of these seats.
the muslims league, led by jinnah, now turned to bitter opposition to the congress.
it began to spread the cry that the muslim minority was in danger of being engulfed by the hindu majority.
it propagated the unscientific and unhistorical theory that hindus aud muslims were two separate nations which could, therefore, never live together.
in 1940 the muslim league passed a resolution demanding partition of the country and the creation of a state to be called pakistan after independence.
the muslim league propaganda gained by the existence of such communal 296 modern india bodies among the hindus as the hindu mahasabha, the hindu communalists echoed tbe muslim communalists by declaring that the hindus were a distinct nation and that india was the land of the hindus.
thus they too accepted the twonation theory, they actively apposed the policy of giving adequate safeguards to the minorities so as to remove their fears of domination by the majority.
in one respect, hindu com nvunalism had even less justification.
in every country, the teligious or linguistic or national minorities have, because of their numerical position, felt at one time or the other that their 9ocial and cultural interests might suffer.
but when the majority has by word and deed given proof that these fears are groundless the fears of the minorities have disappeared, but if a section of the people belonging to the majority become communal or sectional and start talking and working against the minorities, the minorities tend to feel unsafe.
communal or sectional leadership of the minori ties is then strengthened.
for example, during the 1930s the muslim league was strong only in areas where the muslims were in a minority.
on .the other hand in such areas as the northwestern frontier province, the punjab, the sindh, and bengal, where the muslims were in a majority and, therefore, felt relatively securer, the muslim league remained weak.
interestingly enough, the communal groupshindu as well as muslima did not hesitate to join hands against the congress.
in the north western frontier province, the punjab, sindh, and bengal, the hindu communalists helped the muslim league and other communal groups to form ministries which opposed the congress.
another characteristic the various communal groups shared was their tendency to adopt pro government political attitudes.
it is to be noted that none of the communal groups and parties, which talked of hindu and muslim nationalism, took active part in the struggle against foreign rule.
they saw the people belonging to other religions and the nationalist leaders as the real enemies.
the communal groups and parties also shied away from social and economic demands of the common people, which as we have seen above, were being increasingly taken up by the nationalist movement.
in this respect, they increasingly came to represent the upper class vested interests.
jawaharlal nehru noted this as early as 1933  the bulwork of communalism today is political reaction and so we find that communal loaders inevitably tend to become reactionaries in political and economic matters.
groups of upper class people try to cover up their own class interests by making it appear that they stand for the communal demands of religious minorities or majorities.
a critical examination of the various communal demands put forward on behalf of hindus, muslims or others reveals that they have nothing to do with the masses.
national movement during tite second world war the vsecond world war broke out in september 1939 when nazi germany invaded poland in pursuance of hitlers scheme for german expansion.
earlier he had occupied austria in march 1938 and czechoslovakia in march 1939. britain and france, which had tried their best to placate hitler, were forced to go to polands aid the government of india immediately joined the war struggle for swaraj 297 without consulting the national congress or the elected members of the central legislature, the national congress was in full sympathy with the victims of fascist aggression.
it was willing to help the forces of democracy in their struggle  against fascism.
but, the congress leaders asked, how was it possible for an enslaved nation to aid others in their fight for freedom they therefore demanded that india must be declared freeor at least effective power put in indian handsbefore it could actively participate in the war.
the british government refused to accept this demand, and the congress ordered its ministries to resign.
in october 1940, gandhi gave the call for a limited satyagraha by a few selected individals.
the satyagraha was kept limited so as not to embarrass britains war effort by a mass upheaval in india the aims of this movement were explained as follows by gandhi in a letter to the viceroy.
.
.
t h e congress is as much opposed to victory for nazism os any british citizen can be.
but their objective cannot be carried to the extent of their participation in the war.
and since you and the secretary of state for india have declared that the whole of india is voluntarily helping the war effort, it becomes necessary to make clear that the vast majority of the people of india are not interested in it.
they make no distinction between nazism and the double autocracy that rules india.
two major changes in world politics occured during 1941. having occupied poland, belgium, holland, norway, and france in the west as well as most of eastern europe, nazi germany attacked the soviet union on 22 june 1941. on 7 december japan launched a surprise attack on the american fleet at pearl harbour and joined the war on the side of germany and italy.
it quickly overran the philippines, itidochina, indonesia, malaya and burma.
it occupied rangoon in march 1942. this brought the war to indias doorstep.
the british government now desperately wanted the active cooperation of indians in the war effort.
to secure this cooperation it sent to india in march 1942 a mission headed by a cabinet minister, sir stafford cripps, who had earlier been a radical member of the labour party and a strong supporter of indian national movement.
even though cripps declared that the aim of british policy in india was the earliest possible realisation of selfgovernment in india, detailed negotiations between him and the congress leaders broke down, the british government refused to accept the congress demand for the immediate transfer of effective power to indians.
on the other hand, the indian leaders could not be satisfied by mere promises for the future while the viceroy retained his autocratic powers in the present.
they were anxious to cooperate ia the war effort, especially as the japanese army endangered indian territory.
but they could do so, they felt, only when a national government was formed in the country.
the failure of the cripps mission embittered the people of india.
while they still fully sympathised with the antifascist forces, they felt that the existing political situation in the country had become intolerable.
the congress now decided to take active eteps to compel the british to accept the indian demand for independence.
the all india congress committee met at bombay on 8 298 modern india august 1942. it passed the famous quit india resolution and proposed the starting of a nonviolent mass struggle under gandhis leadership to achieve this aim.
the resolution declared.
,.. .the immediate ending of british rule in india is an urgent necessity, both for the sake of india and for the success of the cause of tbe united nations.... india, the classic land nf modern imperialism, has become the crux of the question, for by the freedom of india will britain and the united nations be judged, and the peoples of asia and africa be filled with hope and enthusiasm.
the ending of british rule in this country is thus a vital and immediate issue on which depends the future of the war and the success of freedom end democracy.
a free india will assure this success by throwing all her great resources in the struggle for freedom and against the aggression of nazism, fascism and imperialism.
addressing the congress delegates on the night of 8 august, gandhi said  i, therefore, want freedom immediately, this very night, before dawn, if i. can be had... .fraud and untruth today are stalking the world ...you may take it from me that i am not going to strike a bargain with the viceroy for mil.
is tries and the like.
i am not going to be satisfied with anything ahort of complete freedom .. .here is a mantra, a short one, that i give you.
you may iibprlnt it on your hearts and let every breath, of yours give expression to it.
the mantra is do or die.
we shall either free india or die in the attempt we shall not livf to see the perpetuation of our slavery  but before the congress could start a movement, the government struck hard.
early in the morning of 9 august, gandhi and other congress leaders were arrested and the congress was once again declared illegal.
the news of these arrests left the country aghast, and a spontaneous movement of protest arose everywhere, giving expression to the pent up anger of the people.
left leaderless and without any organisation, the people reacted in any manner they could.
all over the country there were hartals, strikes in factories, schools and colleges, and demonstrations which were lathicharged and fired upon.
angered by repeated firings and repression, in many places the people took to violent actions.
they attacked the symbols of british authority the police stations, post offices, railway stations, etc.
they cut telegraph and telephone wires and railway lines, and burnt government buildings.
madras and bengal were the most effected in this respect.
in many places the rebels seized temporary control over many towns, cities, and villages.
british authority dis appeared in parts of uttar pradesh, bihar, west bengal, orissa, andhra, tamil nadu and maharashtra.
in some areas, tho revolutionaries set up parallel governments.
in general, the students, workers, and the peasants provided the backbone of the revolt while the upper classes and the bureaucracy remained loyal to the government.
the government on its part went all out to crush the 1942 movement.
its repression knew no bounds.
the priss was completely muzzled.
the demonstrating crowds were machinegunned and even bombed from the air.
prisoners were tortured.
the police and secret police reigned supreme the military took over many towns and cities.
over 10,000 people died in police and military firings.
rebellious villages had to pay huge sums as punitive fines and the villagers had to undergo mass floggings.
india had not witnessed such struggle for swaraj 299 intense repression since the revolt of 1857. id the end the government succeeded in crushing the movement.
the revolt of 1942, as it has been termed, was in fact shortlived.
its importance lay in the fact that it demonstrated the depth that nationalist feeling hadreached in the country and the great capacity for struggle and sacrifice that the people had developed.
after the suppicssion of the revolt of 1942, there was hardly any political activity inside the country till the war ended in 1945. the established leaders of the national movement were behind the bars, and no new leaders arufie to take their place or to give a new lead to the country.
in 1943, bengal was plunged into the worst famine in recent history.
within a few months over three million people died of starvation.
there was deep anger among the people for the government could have prevented the famine from taking such a heavy toll of life.
this anger, however, found little political expression.
the national movement, however, found a new expression outside the countrys frontiers, subhas chandra bose had escaped from india in march 1941 to go to the soviet union for help.
but when ihe soviet union joined the allies in june 1941, he went to germany.
in february 1943 he left for japan to organise an armed struggle against british rule with japanese help.
in singapore he formed the azad hind fauj indian national army or ina for short to conduct a military campaign for the liberation of india.
he was assisted by rash behan bose, an old terrorist revolutionary.
before the arrival of subhash bose, steps towards the organisation of the ina had been taken by general mohan singh at that tnre a captain i tie british indian army.
the ina was joined in large .
u i u.   i i, l residents in southeast asia and by indian soldier , .
i  ijj by the japanese forces in malaya, singapore and burma.
subhash bose, who was now called netaji by the soldiers of the ina, gave his followers the battle cry ofjai hiad, the ina joined the japanese army in its march on india from burma.
inspired by the aim of freeing their homeland, the soldieri and officers of the ina hoped to enter india as its liberators with subhash bose at the head of the provisional government of free india.
with the collapse of jpaa hi the war during 194445, the ina too met defeat, and sub hash bose was killed in an aeroplane accident on his way to tokyo.
even though his strategy of winning freedom in cooperation with the fascist powers was criticised at the time by most indian nationalists, by organising the ina he set an inspiring example of patriotism 300 modern india before the indian people and the indian army, he was hailed as netaji by the entire country.
postwar struggle with the end of the war in europe in april 1945, indias struggle for freedom entered a new phase.
the revolt of 1942 and the ina had revealed the heroism and determination of the indian people.
with the release of the national leaders from jail, the people began to look forward to another, perhaps the final, struggle for freedom.
the new struggle took the form of a massive movement against the trial of the soldiers and officers of the ina.
the government decided to put on trial in the red fort at delhi generals shah nawaz, gurdial singh dhiuon, and prein sehgal of the ina, who had earlier been officers in the british indian army.
they were accused of having broken their oath of loyalty to the british crown and thus of having become traitors.
on the other subhash chandra bose at a rally of indian women in singapore courtesy nehru memorial museum and llbntry struggle for swaraj 301 hand, the people welcomed them as national heroes.
huge rormlar demonstrations demanding their release were held alt over the i.ountiy.
the entire country now seethed with excitement and confidence lhi time tile struggle v.ould be won.
they would not let these 1 roc hr pui.ishcd.
but.
ihe british government was this lime in no to igihia njimi opjnion.
even though the court martial held the ,tna vjriei guilty, ihe government felt jt expedient to set mcir.
free, tie ebanged annum ir ihe bntish government is explained by several iiiciors.
firstly, the war he,j changed the balance of power in the world.
not mrir.
but the urjtcrl sidles of america and the soviet union emerged  11 of the war as big powers.
both supported indias demand for free liorn.
svcnncly, even ihouh 13main was on the winning side in the war, its t.comnnit ani njit.uy power was shatteied.
it would take britain years to rehabilitate itself.
moreover, there was a change of government in britain.
the conservatives were replaced by the labour party many of whose members supported the congress demands.
the british soldiers were weary of war.
having fought and shed their blood for nearly six years., they had no desire to spendmariy more years away from home in india suppressing the indian peoples struggle for freedom.
thirdh, the british indian government could no longer rely on the indian personnel of its civil administration and armed forces to suppress tbs national movement.
the ina had shown that patriotic ideas had entered tiie ranks of the professional indian army, the chief instrument of british, rule in india.
another straw in the wind was the famous revolt of the indian naval ratings at bombay in february 19.46. the ratings had fought a sevenhour battle with the army and navy and had surrendered only when asked to do so by the national leaders.
moreover, there were also widespread strikes in the indian air force.
the indian signal corps at jabalpur also went on strike.
the o.ther two major instruments of bntish rule, the police and the bureaucracy, were .iso showing signs of nationalist leanings.
they could no longer be safely used to suppress the national movement.
for example, the poupe fore in bihar and reuli went an strike.
fourthly, and above all, the confident and determined mood, of the indian people was by.
now obvious.
they would, no longer tolerate the humiliation, of foreign rule.
they would no,lon.ger rest till freedom was waii, thece was the naval mutiny and the struggle for.
the rlqase o ina prisoners.
in addition there were during 194546 numerous agita 302 modern india lions, strikes, hartals and demonstrations all over the country, even in many princely states such as hyderabad, travancore, and kashmir.
for example, 111 november 1945, lakh,1 of people demonstrated in the streets in calcutta to demand the release of the ina prisoners.
for three days there was virtually no government authority left in th city.
again, on 12 february 1946, there was andthej mass demonstfation in the city to demand the release of abdui rashid, one of the ina prisoners.
on 22 february, bombay observed a complete hartal an4 general  strike in factories and offices in sympathy with the naval ratings in revolt.
the army was called in to suppress, the popular upsurge.
over 250. people were shot dead on the streets in 48 bouts.
there was also larfgp scale labour unrest all over the country.
there was.
hardly an industry in which strikes did not occur.
in july 1946, there was art all india strike by the postal and telegraph workers.
railway workers in south india went on strike in august 1946. peasant movement also became more militant in this period.
struggles for land and against high rents took place in hydetabad.
malabar, bengal, u.p., bihar, and maharashtra students in schools and colleges took a leading part in organizing strikes, hartals, and demonstrations.
the biitish government, therefore, sent in march 1946 a cabinet mission to india to negotiate with the indian leaders ehe terms for the transfer of power to indians.
the cabinet mission proposed a two tiered federal plan which was expected to maintain national unity while conceding the largest measure of regional autonomy.
there was to be a federation of the provinces and the states, jfiwahailal nehru, tej bahadur sapru and kailash math katju arriving to defend ina prisoners.
courtesy nehru memorial museum and library struggle for swaraj 303 with the federal centre controlling only defence, foreign affairs, and communications.
at the same time, individual provinces could form regional unions to which they could surrenderby mutual agreement some of their powers.
both the national congress and the muslim league accepted this plan.
but the two could not agree on the plan for an interim government which would convene a constituent assembly to frame a constitution for the free, federal india the two also put differing interpretations on the cabinet mission scheme to which they had agreed earlier.
in the end, in september 1946, at.
interim cabinet, headed by jawaharlal nehru, was formed by tbe congress.
the muslim league joined the cabinet in october after some hesitation hut it decided to boycott the constituent assembly.
on 20 february 1947, clement attlee, british premier, declared that the british would quit india by june 1948. but the elation of coining independence was marred by the large scale communal riots during and after august 1946. the hindu and muslim communalists blamed each other for starting the heinous killings and competed with each other in cruelty.
mahatma gandhi, engulfed in gloom at this total disregard of elementary humanity and seeing truth and nonviolence cast to the winds, toured east bengal and bihar on foot to check the riot.
many other hindus and muslims laid down their lives in the effort to extinguish the fire of communalism.
but the seeds had been bown too deep by the communal elements, aided and abetted by the alien government.
gandhi and other nationalists fought vainly against communal prejudices and passions.
finally, lord louis mountbatten, who had come to india as viceroy in march 1947, worked out a compromise after long discussions with the leaders of the congress and the muslim league the country was to be free but not united.
india was to be partitioned and a new state of pakistan was to be created along with a free india.
the nationalist leaders agreed to the partition of india in order to avoid the largescale bloodbath that communal riots threatened.
but they did not accept the two nation theory.
they did not agree to hand over onethird of the country to the muslim league as the latter wanted and as the proportion of the muslims in indian population would have indicated.
they agreed to the separation of only those areas where the influence of the muslim league was predominant, in the north western frontier province, and the sylhet district of assam where the influence of the league was doubtful, a plebiscite was to be held.
in other words the country was to be partitioned but not on the basis of hinduism and islam.
the indian nationalists accepted partition not because there were two nations in indiaa hindu nation and a muslim nationbut because the historical development of communalism, both hindu and muslim, over the past 70 years or so had created a situation where the alternative to partition was mass killing of lakhs of innocent people in senseless and barbaric communal riots.
if these riots had been confined to one section of the country, the congress leaders could have tried to curb them and taken a strong stand against partition.
but unfortunately the fratricidal riots were taking place everywere and actively 304 modern india involved both hindus and muslims.
on top of it all, the country was still ruled by the toreigneia who did little to check the riots.
on the other hand, the foreign government rather encouraged these riots by their divisive policies, perhaps hoping to play the two newly independent states against each other.
the announcement that india and pakistan would be free was made on 3 june 1947. the princely states were given the choice of joining either of the new states.
under the pressure of the popular states peoples movements and guided by the masterful diplomacy of sardar patel, the home minister, most of them acceeded to india.
the nawab of juna gadh, the nizam of hyderabad, and the maharaja of jammu and kashmir held back for some time.
the nawab of junagadh, a small state on the coast of kathiawar, announced accession to pakistan even though the people of the state desired to join india.
in the end, indian troops occupied the state and a plebiscite was held which went in favour of joining india.
the nizam of hyderabad made an attempt to claim an inde pendent status but was forced to accede in 1948 after an internal revolt had broken out in its telengana area and after indian troops had marched into hyderabad.
the maharaja of kashmir also delayed accession to india or pakistan even though the popular forces led by the national conference wanted accession to india.
however, he acceeded to india in october 1947 after pathans and irregular armed forces of pakistan invaded kashmir.
on 15 august 1947, india celebrated with joy its first day of freedom.
the sacrifices of generations of patriots and the blood of countless martyrs had borne fruit.
their dream was now a reality.
in a memorable address to tlie constituent assembly on the night of 14 august, jawaharlal nehru, giving expression to the feelings of the peoplej said  long yean ago we made a tryst with daft tiny, and now the time coma when we utial redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very autatan dally.
referring to communalum jawaharlal nehru had written in 1946 hk m 7h discovery of india it is our fault, of course, and we mu it suffer for our failings.
but i cannot excuse or forgive the british authorities for the deliberate part they have played in creating disruption in india.
all other injuries will pass, but this will continue to plague us for a much longer period.
at the stroke of midnight hour, when the world sleeps, india will awake to life ana freedom.
a moment comes, which comes but rarefy in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance, it is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of india and her people ami to iv still larger cause of humanity.
..we end today a period of ill fortune and india discovers herself ugaiiu the achievement we celebrate today is but of incessrnt striving so that we may fulfil the pledges we have so often taken.
but the sense of joy, which should have been overwhelming and unlimited, was mixed with pain and sadness.
the dream of indian unity had been shattered and brother had been torn from brother what was worse, even at the very moment of freedom a communal orgy, accompanied by indescribable brutalities, was consuming thousands of lives in both india and pakistan.
lakhs of refugees, forced to leave the lands of their forefathers, were pouring into the two new states.
the symbol of this tragedy at the moment of struggle for swaraj 305 national triumph was the forlorn figure of gandhijithe man who had given the message of nonviolence, truth, and love and courage and manliness to the indian people, the man who symbolised all that was best in indian culture.
in the midst of national , rejoicing, he was touring the hatetorn land of bengal, trying to bring comfort to people who were even then paying through senseless communal slaughter the price of freedom.
and the shouting and the celebrations had hardly died down when on 30 january 1948 an assassina hatefilled hindu fanaticextinguished the light that had shown so bright in our land for over 70 years.
thus gandhi died a martyr to the cause of unity to which he had always been devoted.
in a way, with the achievement of ffeedom, the country had taken only the first step the overthrow of foreign rule had only removed the chief obstacle in the path of national regeneration.
centuries of backwardness, prejudice, inequality, and ignorance still weighed on the land and the long haul had just begun.
for as rabindranath tagore had remarked writing of those months, nehru wrote later fear and hatred blinded our minds and all the restraints which civilization imposes were swept away.
horror piled on honor, and sudden emptiness seized us at the brute savagery of human beings.
the lights seemed all to go out not all, for a few still flickered in the raging tempest.
we sorrowed for the dead and the dying, and for those whose suffering was greater than that of death.
we sorrowed even more for india, our common mother, for whose freedom we had laboured these long years.
earlier, in reply to a journalist on the occasion of his birthday in 1947, oaodhi had said that he no longer wished to live bag and that he would invoke the aid of the almighty to take me away from this vale of tests rather than make me a helpless witness of the butchery by mu become savage, whether he dares to call himself a muslim or hindu or what not.
struggle for swaraj 317 three months before his death in 1941  the wheels of fate will some day compel the english to give up their indian empire.
but what kind of india will they leave behind, what stark misery when the stream of their centuries administration runs dry at last, what a waitc of mud uid filth will they leave behind them.
with confidence in their capacity and their will to succeed, the people of india now set out to change the face of their country and to build the just and the good society.
e x e r c i s e  s 1. in what ways did the developments during the first world war and in the immediate postwar years favour the resurgence of nationalism in africa and asia in general and in india in particular 2. trace the early development of gandhi as a political leader and discuss his basic political ideas.
3. trace the development of the noncooperation movement and the khilafat agitation from 1919 to 1922. how far did ihese two movements represent a new stage in the growth of the national movement 4. what were the different aspects of nationalist resurgence in the years 1927 to 1929 5. discuss the course of the nationalist movement from the lahore session of 1929 to the withdrawal of the second civil disobedience movement in 1934.
6. bring out the major political developments in india in the 1930s with special reference to the congress ministries, growth of socialist ideas, congress attitude to world affairs, national movement in the princely states, and the growth of communalism.
7. why do you think did the british change their attitude towards india after 1945 8. how did the national congress react to the second world war what progress did the national movement make during the war years.
clearly bring out the role of the quit india resolution, the revolt of 1942, and the indian national army.
9. write short notes on  a the montaguchelmsford reforms, b the rowlatt act, c the swarajists, d the revolutionary terrorist movement after 1925, e the government of india act of 1935, 0 the cabinet mission, g gandhi and the partition of india, h integsroitat jthe princely states with the union of india.
at